---
title: The Top 10 Albums of the '10s
author: Griffin Metz
img: /uploads/Griffin_Metz_2020-04-29.jpg
---

The 2010s were a pivotal decade in my life. This period encompassed my
core teenage years and more, spanning from my entrance into high school
through college graduation and my ascent into adulthood and the working
world. Alongside these life-altering events, the decade also represents
a period when my musical tastes expanded vastly. Starting the decade as
a "wrong generation" classic rock purist teen, I opened up my ears over
the course of these years and came to appreciate and love a much wider
variety of genres including hip-hop, R\&B, pop, and even some country
music. As my musical evolution was occurring, I was lucky to experience,
in real time, a wealth of phenomenal new music. Far too much fantastic
music was released in the decade for me to justly pay tribute to all of
it here, so I've filtered it down to my personal top 10 albums of the
decade. Played in the backdrop while hanging out with family at home,
blasted in my college dorm room as we duked it out in Super Smash Bros,
bumped in my best friend's Jeep as we cruised around town, these albums
formed the soundtrack of my life over the past 10 years. Through the
highs and lows, these albums pumped me up, presented new perspectives,
shared relatable experiences, and most of all, brought me great joy. I
had an extremely difficult time not only whittling this fantastic decade
of music down to just 10 albums but then having to rank them against one
another. But I did what had to be done and so now I present to you: my
top 10 albums of the 2010s.

**#10**

***Golden Hour***

**Kacey Musgraves**

**2018**

Before I heard Kacey Musgraves's *Golden Hour* I never would have
considered myself a country music fan. My view of country was comprised
of the classic stereotypes: pick-up trucks, God, rodeos, beer, the like.
But Kacey-- alongside a handful of other country artists like Sturgill
Simpson and Chris Stapleton-- showed me that the genre actually has a
whole lot more to offer.

*Golden Hour*'s sound is rooted in country music, featuring plenty of
finger plucking, banjo and string flourishes, and sliding steel guitar,
plus a slight Texas twang in the vocals. But on top of this beautifully
arranged country framework, Kacey also pulls in sounds and ideas from a
diverse myriad of other genres, spanning across folk, pop, soft rock,
and even disco. There's a psychedelic tinge to album opener "Slow Burn"
with its keyboard textures, lush background vocals, and spacey string
sweeps. "Velvet Elvis" swaggers forward with a grooving bass line and
tight driving drums. And she somehow manages to seamlessly integrate
vocoder vocals into her country sound in the gorgeously uplifting "Oh,
What A World."

Despite the variety of genres borrowed from, none of these ostensibly
incongruous elements overwhelm or crowd what for the most part are
relatively simple songs that let Kacey's beautiful voice and melodies
shine. Known on previous releases for her biting sarcasm and wit, Kacey
dials it back a bit on this album in favor of more celebratory and
sincere themes, sharing the joys of love and observing the peaks and
valleys of life. But she still saves some bite for "High Horse", a
danceable disco-infused track that sees her knock an arrogant someone
down a peg. With a sunny disposition throughout both sonically and
lyrically, listening to *Golden Hour* feels like lying down in a field
on a bright spring day and watching the clouds roll by. Lie back, relax,
and enjoy.

It took a special album to break through my total aversion to country
music. But *Golden Hour* won me over fast and I was hooked. Pretty soon
the tracks were on repeat, and I was hungry for more. Just like that,
against all odds, I was a country music fan.

**Favorite Track:** "Oh, What A World"

**#9**

***The Idler Wheel Is Wiser Than the Driver of the Screw and Whipping
Cords Will Serve You More Than Ropes Will Ever Do***

**Fiona Apple**

**2012**

If the title of this record seems a bit pretentious to you, that's
because it kind of is. Fiona Apple is somewhat of an enigmatic figure,
agreeing to interviews sparingly and having only released 5 albums to
date, despite crashing onto the scene as a 19-year-old with her 1996
piano-rock hit "Criminal." Never one to rush her process, Fiona took 7
years between albums to create her best work yet, the succinctly titled
*The Idler Wheel Is Wiser Than the Driver of the Screw and Whipping
Cords Will Serve You More Than Ropes Will Ever Do*. (Which believe it or
not, is only her second-longest album title after 1999's *When The
Pawn*... I'll save the space and let you Google the full title if you're
curious)

*The Idler Wheel...* finds Fiona at her rawest and most vulnerable. With
stunning eloquence, she reflects upon past failed relationships, her
paradoxical desires for connection and isolation, and her tendencies
towards self-destructive behavior. She delivers poetic lines with
unrestrained emotion in her voice, channeling her inner passion, power,
and imperfections. These vocals combine with her entrancing piano
accompaniment to form the melodies at the core of each composition. This
pairing is supported by an expansive percussive palette provided by her
primary collaborator, Charley Drayton. With brushes, timpani, marimba,
and more, he adds an impressive variety of textures and timbres to the
album's sound. Deceptively simple, the songs are challenging yet catchy.
All this is wrapped in sparse, resonant production from the two that
places you right in the room with them. The album closes with one of its
strongest moments, the nearly a capella track "Hot Knife", which slowly
builds to envelope you in a cocoon of layered vocals supported only by
distant timpani.

Fiona lets her art speak for itself and with music this fantastic, it's
for good reason.

When I first heard this album, I had never heard anything like it. I
wasn't sure what to think of it initially, but something about it hooked
me and kept me coming back. Once I was in it, the album showed me how
poetic lyrics can be, the range of emotion and pain that vocals can
convey, and how well a strong melody can pull you in.

**Favorite Track:** "Werewolf"

**#8**

***Modern Vampires of the City***

**Vampire Weekend**

**2013**

Vampire Weekend has always had a singular sound. An energetic blend of
indie rock, Paul Simon-inspired worldbeat, and baroque pop, the group
quickly earned a spot as one of the world's most exciting new rock bands
following the release of their first album in 2008. After delivering
their sophomore effort, the similarly excellent *Contra*, just two years
later, the group took 3 more years to experiment and evolve their sound
further. The result was the best album they'd ever made.

The shift in the band's sound is forecast by the album's cover-- a
monochrome photograph of a foggy New York City cityscape-- especially
when compared to the poppy and brighter covers of their first two
releases. This effort took the group's unique sound and further
developed it, introducing a darker, more melancholic mood and more
introspective lyrical themes. The progression in sound was likely aided
by Ariel Rechtshaid, the first outside producer to work with the band,
who crafted the album's impeccable production and oversaw the band as
they played with ideas they'd never used before like sampling and
pitch-shifted vocals. The resulting music occupies the headspace of a
maturing young adult, contemplating their place in this world,
questioning religious beliefs, and pondering death. Despite dealing with
topics that could easily weigh the music down, the album never feels
heavy or overbearing. The group's pop sensibilities shine through, even
on "Diane Young", an outwardly upbeat tune about the cheery topic of
dying young. My favorite moment of the album comes midway through
"Hannah Hunt", when the drums come crashing in and lead into a gorgeous
piano break before singer Ezra Koenig belts the chorus once more, this
time one octave higher in a raw, passionate, affecting performance.

I became a fan of Vampire Weekend not too long before *Modern Vampires*
was released. A high-school junior, I remember anxiously awaiting the
album's arrival, playing the pre-release singles on repeat during the
weeks leading up to the album drop. When it finally came, it did not
disappoint and despite dozens of listens since, it somehow still manages
to grow on me over the years.

**Favorite Track:** "Hannah Hunt"

**#7**

***Currents***

**Tame Impala**

**2015**

Tame Impala's music has a certain "stuck out of time" quality to it. On
first glance, the psychedelic landscapes on which their songs are built
may harken back to the 60s. But then you'll begin to notice certain
elements that would seem out of place or even anachronistic next to the
music of that era: swirling synths, drum machine, disco basslines,
soulful R\&B-inspired vocals, electronic textures. Whereas Tame Impala's
first two efforts, *Innerspeaker* and *Lonerism*, were a bit more rooted
in psychedelic rock with a modern twist, *Currents* sees mastermind
Kevin Parker throw all kinds of new influences into the mix to create an
album on another level of variety and ambition.

Right off the bat, the album kicks off looking ahead to the future with
its sprawling opener "Let It Happen", a progressive, glitchy,
psychedelic, danceable track unlike anything you've heard before. From
there, the band bends and shapes their psychedelic sound in different
directions, yet each song is tied together with emotional lyrics on
heartbreak and growth and cohesive production that just makes you want
to dance. Kevin croons apologies to a wronged lover over dreamy synths
and tight drums in the soulful track "'Cause I'm a Man." And the funky,
disco grooving "The Less I Know the Better" has barely gotten out of my
head since that first time I heard it. The entire project is
immaculately crafted and produced with a tremendous attention to detail,
surrounding you with a gorgeous wall of sound. I'm still discovering new
details on repeat listens: a finger snap here, a background harmony
there, or a synthesized string run over there.

This achievement is even more incredible when considering the fact that
Tame Impala is a one-man act. Everything you hear on *Currents* was
written, performed, recorded, produced, and mixed by Kevin Parker.
Whether he's pulling inspiration from the past, pioneering the future of
music, or striving to live in "The Moment", all I know is that I'm glad
he's around today, making music for us to marvel at, connect with, and
dance to.

Like many of these other albums, *Currents* was another grower for me. I
liked the album a lot upon release and then it took on new life for me
months later after I introduced it to my best friend. I have many great
memories of our countless listens of this album and multiple times
seeing its songs performed live. All the while, it never got old; its
grooves only got more entrancing and its themes more relatable.

\*\*Favorite Track: "\*\*The Less I Know The Better"

**#6**

***DAMN.***

**Kendrick Lamar**

**2017**

One downside to releasing two game-changing albums back-to-back: the
immense pressure and impossible levels of hype that follow you all the
way until the next one comes. I personally find it exceedingly rare for
an artist to meet my own soaring expectations when following up an album
that I really love. Oftentimes my favorite albums have to take me by
surprise, coming out of nowhere to circumvent the obstacle of intense
anticipation and scrutiny. *DAMN* is the exception that proves this
rule.

By the time *DAMN* was in the works, Kendrick Lamar already held a claim
to the title of "greatest rapper alive." After delivering an ambitious
and narratively-rich duo of albums one after another in *good kid,
m.A.A.d city* and *To Pimp A Butterfly*, fans wondered how he would be
able to follow up next. He did so with a different kind of record. A
record that's cohesive but no longer serves a single narrative.
Conscious and challenging, but more accessible than ever. Slimmer and
featuring fewer guest artists than before. *DAMN* is forward-thinking,
personal, universal, and a blast to listen to all the way through.

Like the album itself, each song is presented with an all-caps, one-word
title that teases its main theme. Equally balanced between heavy-hitting
bangers, pop-rap jams, and atmospheric trips, all feature Kendrick's
top-notch lyricism and captivating beats crafted by a bevy of
first-class producers. After the cryptic opening skit, "BLOOD", the
album roars off with the exhilarating and dynamic track "DNA." In the
laidback "YAH", Kendrick glides over a hazy, looping instrumental.
"LOYALTY" and "LOVE" serve up two of Kendrick's catchiest tracks yet,
featuring delectable hooks performed by Rihanna and Zacari respectively.
The instrumental in "XXX" shifts for each new verse, with an
electrifying second verse that incorporates police sirens and heavy
breathing into the beat before the song shifts into a mellow final verse
with a remarkably apt U2 feature. In the final stretch of the album,
Kendrick flexes his unmatched storytelling abilities, exploring his
greatest anxieties at 3 different parts of this life in "FEAR" and
sharing a fascinating coincidental real-life tale in "DUCKWORTH"
involving his father, a young hooligan named Anthony, and himself.

And with that Kendrick extended his impeccable run of albums to three in
a row. Can he keep it going? At this point I wouldn't be surprised,
though there's no denying that the bar couldn't be much higher.

\*\*Favorite Track: "\*\*XXX."

**#5**

***Yeezus***

**Kanye West**

**2013**

The explosive electronic burst that kicks off *Yeezus* immediately
announces to the world that this is a different kind of project for
Kanye. In this release, the artist who initially built his career on
"chipmunk soul" beats and had most recently left us with a maximalist
classic in *My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy* now stripped his music
down to bone to form a cold, harsh, thrilling new sound. Shucking off
the lush instrumentation and innumerable collaborators seen on previous
releases, *Yeezus* incorporates elements of industrial, electronic, and
punk music and distills it all down into lean, compelling compositions.
The result is a masterfully crafted exercise in minimalism that is
gripping from front to back.

A tribal drum beat drives "Black Skinhead" forward while Kanye spits
bars over a deranged instrumental built out of breathy vocals and
screams in the backdrop. In the haunting "I Am A God", the beat
screeches to a halt midway through the song and he shrieks out, unhinged
like a god out of control. He rails against modern-day racism in "New
Slaves" before the sinister, sparse beat makes way for a majestic coda
featuring Frank Ocean's beautiful vocals and an obscure sample from
Hungarian band Omega. With its sorrowful sample of Nina Simone's
"Strange Fruit", towering synthesized horns, and effortless blend of
ferocious rapping and Auto-Tuned yet emotional singing, the 6-minute
long "Blood On The Leaves" is the most ambitious and impressive song of
the whole lot. The album sends us off with "Bound 2", a soulful callback
to Kanye's early work.

From its stark packaging to its abrasive opening moment to the vulgar
lyrics of the last track, *Yeezus* is an arrogant, self-assured utterly
successful statement. A rapper-producer at the top of his game, Kanye
delivered an album that you can't help but love even as it seemingly
tries to push you away.

Still a newly burgeoning fan of hip-hop after recently discovering
Kanye's previous album, I bought *Yeezus* soon after its release. On
first listen, I remember sitting perplexed and unsure by the time I hit
Kanye's freak-out moment midway through "I Am A God." But after a few
more listens, the album quickly won me over and soon became one of my
most-played albums of all-time.

\*\*Favorite Track: "\*\*Blood On The Leaves"

**#4**

***Run the Jewels 2***

**Run the Jewels**

**2014**

By 2014, Killer Mike and El-P were no newcomers to the hip-hop scene.
Sure, *Run The Jewels 2* was only their second album released together,
but prior to joining forces, the two each had accomplished careers of
their own. El-P was an underground hip-hop powerhouse as a member of
hip-hop group Company Flow, founder of label Definitive Jux, prolific
producer, and he had 3 critical hit solo albums under his belt. Killer
Mike released multiple seminal albums in the southern hip-hop scene and
won a Grammy for a collaboration with Outkast. But when the two came
together to form RTJ, their talents melded to create something far
greater than anyone could have imagined.

El-P lays down the groundwork, bringing his grimy dystopian production
style to the table, creating dark atmospheres out of his beats that hit
you in the face with aggression and oomph. He and Killer Mike weave
through these landscapes with witty wordplay and vitality. The chemistry
between the two is palpable, as they play off of each other and
interject, trading bars and verses. Amid boastful and hilarious lyrics,
the two tackle serious topics including political corruption and drug
addiction, and they deliver one of the most impactful tracks I've ever
heard on police brutality in "Early." The duo brings a handful of
perfectly curated features into the fray from the fiery beat crafted out
of Zach de la Rocha vocals on "Close Your Eyes (And Count to Fuck)" to
the frenetic drum track from Travis Barker on "All Due Respect" to
Gangster Boo's straight-up obscene, script-flipping verse in "Love Again
(Akinyele Back)."

This whole album is full of life with verses that fly by at breakneck
speed and tracks that transition flawlessly into one another. The record
whizzes by after a brisk 39 minutes, leaving you eager to hop right back
on the ride to enjoy it one more time.

When I stumbled across "Close Your Eyes" for the first time, I had never
heard a rap track go so hard. Already a huge fan of Rage Against the
Machine, I was sold right away by Zach de la Rocha's killer verse and
beat-building refrain. When I realized the rest of the album went that
hard too? The neighbors weren't too happy.

\*\*Favorite Track: "\*\*Close Your Eyes (And Count to Fuck)"

**#3**

***good kid, m.A.A.d city***

**Kendrick Lamar**

**2012**

The cover of *good kid, m.A.A.d city* features a polaroid picture of
baby Kendrick Lamar with three of his family members, including an uncle
who holds him while flashing a Crips gang sign to the camera. Scribbled
underneath the photo, sandwiched between the title of the album and
Kendrick's name, is the declaration, "A Short Film". This was perhaps a
strange billing for a musical work (especially one with no accompanying
visual element á la Beyoncé), but listen to the album and you'll see
that the vivid storytelling that Kendrick employs on the record makes it
a surprisingly apt descriptor.

*good kid, m.A.A.d city* tells an affecting story of a good kid pushed
into bad behavior by his peers and the environment in which he lives.
Presented in a nonlinear fashion, the album chronicles a day in the life
of teenage Kendrick growing up in the notoriously gang-ridden Compton,
CA. Songs end with mini-skits that push forward the narrative: snippets
of conversation between Kendrick and his friends or voicemails left on
his phone from his parents. Growing up as a poor black man in the city,
Kendrick inevitably found himself mixed up in the gangster lifestyle.
But rather than glorifying this way of life, *good kid* provides a
glimpse into this world through the eyes of an introspective boy boxed
into certain behaviors by his circumstances and social surroundings.
Songs like the shady "The Art of Peer Pressure" and darkly funky "Good
Kid" reveal that these behaviors are not part of Kendrick's nature but a
product of the surroundings he was born into. This all comes to a head
in "m.A.A.d city", the album's 2-part climax, which reconstructs the
realness of life in Compton with enthralling verses delivered over a
thrilling instrumental peppered with gunfire and backed by dramatic
strings. Kendrick sees the light and sets his sights outside of this way
of life in "Sing About Me, I'm Dying of Thirst", an epic turning point
in the narrative that incorporates impactful accounts from two others
into his own story.

The lyrical heft and narrative of the album alone would be enough to
cement it as an impressive statement but what allows the album to soar
to greatest-of-all-time status are Kendrick's flow and delivery and the
infectious beats that accompany it. The production is often dark and
murky, replicating the oppressive and hopeless atmosphere that Kendrick
is recounting. He employs voice pitching at vital moments in the record,
using a higher pitch to represent his youthful persona or a deeper sound
to represent the perversion of his innocence by the darkness surrounding
him.

Throughout the course of this album (or "short film" as he would call
it), Kendrick provides one of the most powerful insights into black
poverty and gang violence in America, packaged in compelling and
listenable tunes. It is truly remarkable that Kendrick was able to break
out of the tragic path his life started down and instead channel his
experiences to create such masterful art. Stories like his told with
nuance and appeal have a unique ability to inform, inspire, and possibly
change the world. For that I'm extremely grateful.

When this album first released, I was a newly initiated fan of rap who
tended (and still tends to this day) to pay more attention to sounds,
beats, and melodies than to lyrics. And right away these songs offered
more than enough to suck me in. But after countless listens over the
years, sometimes reading along with the lyrics as they fly by, I've come
to learn and appreciate the story and message behind the tracks, making
the album even more compelling and impressive.

\*\*Favorite Track: "\*\*m.A.A.d city"

**#2**

***My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy***

**Kanye West**

**2010**

Kanye West's career was not in the greatest place in 2010. His latest
album *808s & Heartbreak*, was widely misunderstood and deemed a misstep
by many at the time. Then came the infamous incident at the 2009 VMAs,
where he made himself the villain of the music industry by interrupting
Taylor Swift's acceptance speech to extol Beyoncé's video. His planned
nationwide tour with Lady Gaga was cancelled. President Obama called him
a "jackass." It was from this place that the notoriously outspoken and
headline-grabbing artist decided to take a break from the limelight and
hide away in Hawaii to work on his next project. He returned with an
ambitious, ostentatious opus, widely revered as not only his
masterpiece, but one of the greatest albums that hip-hop has ever seen.

The record starts off with Nicki Minaj doing her best English accent,
welcoming the audience to listen up to a familiar, warped tale. The
album that unfolds explores how Kanye's dreams of fame, success, and
recognition have not come to fruition as delightfully as he imagined.
These themes of fame and celebrity are sonically represented by a
maximalist aesthetic seen throughout the album. Most songs are packed
with countless features and collaborators. "All of the Lights" alone has
quite a few, stop me if you've heard of any of them before: Rihanna, Kid
Cudi, Tony Williams, The-Dream, Charlie Wilson, John Legend, Elly
Jackson, Alicia Keys, Elton John, Fergie, Ryan Leslie, Drake, Alvin
Fields, and Ken Lewis. In fact, features provide some of the greatest
moments on the record, like Nicki Minaj's electric verse on "Monster"
and John Legend's soulful hook and Chris Rock's hilarious skit, both in
"Blame Game." Each song is flawlessly constructed and produced with
meticulously stacked samples, enormous drum beats, and beautiful string
and horn arrangements. The album also displays a prominent rock
influence from the King Crimson sample at the core of "Power", the
interpolation of Black Sabbath's "Iron Man" that provides the melody for
the chorus in "Hell Of A Life", and the guitar riff that drives
"Gorgeous."

A deep dive into Kanye's psyche, the album juxtaposes the braggadocio of
his larger than life ego with his vulnerable, insecure, reflective side.
The epic centerpiece of the record, "Runaway", strips all pretenses
about his self-confidence as he warns a lover of all the baggage he
brings to their relationship. The song features more singing than
rapping from Kanye, culminating in a stunning wordless vocoder solo.

Everybody seems to have their own opinion of Kanye West. As a huge fan,
I'll admit he certainly makes it difficult to be a fan all the time (his
VMA moment and recent embrace of Trump come to mind). But it's hard to
dispute that *My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy* is anything but an
absolute masterwork.

This was the album that got me into hip-hop. Looking to expand into a
genre I had previously dismissed, I sought out the most celebrated album
by one of the most critically acclaimed yet personally divisive figures
in rap. Struggling on first listen to get into a style of music that I
had thus far resisted, the familiar tune of Black Sabbath in "Hell Of A
Life" gave me the first foothold to latch onto. The energy, swagger, and
irresistible drum beat of "Power" yanked me in closer. From there, there
was simply too much greatness to turn away.

\*\*Favorite Track: "\*\*Power"

**#1**

***Channel Orange***

**Frank Ocean**

**2012**

The more I listen to *Channel Orange*, the more I settle on the belief
that it's a perfect album. Hidden behind a simplistic unobtrusive orange
cover is an album jam-packed with sonic variety, emotion, energy,
experimentation, and atmosphere. Starting to make a name for himself in
the industry through his contributions to the Odd Future collective and
an excellent debut mixtape, *Nostalgia, Ultra*, Frank overdelivered with
his first full album, creating one of the greatest albums of all-time.

Cinematic throughout, with ambient interludes sprinkled here and there
to set the mood, *Channel Orange* is a joy to listen to in its every
second. There isn't a moment wasted on this thing. Anchored by Frank's
incredible multi-octave vocals, the album takes an R\&B baseline and
infuses it with an array of musical flavorings. Alternating between a
tender falsetto and passionate baritone, he croons over watery synths in
the dazzling, heartbreaking opener "Thinkin Bout You." He delivers
biting commentary on wealth in society on the soaring Stevie
Wonder-esque jazzy soul track "Sweet Life." André 3000 and fellow Odd
Future alum Earl Sweatshirt bring a taste of rap with amazing guest
verses in the spiritual and reflective "Pink Matter" and lethargic yet
catchy "Super Rich Kids." John Mayer adds texture with a spacey guitar
solo in transition track, "White." Frank (a former pop music
ghostwriter) shows off his ability to write a superb hook in the bouncy
pop of "Lost." Live drums and slap bass bring the energy to funk-rock
stomper, "Monks", a sexually-charged track full of Buddhist imagery. And
of course, the tremendous "Pyramids" slides through time and genre,
exploring EDM, psychedelia, and Prince-inspired funk as it weaves
together parallel stories about Cleopatra and a modern day stripper.

These seamlessly eclectic musical stylings support passionately
delivered lyrics on unrequited love, empty wealth, drug abuse, and
spirituality. It all comes together to form something captivating,
stimulating, and downright extraordinary.

*Channel Orange* caught me by surprise. I don't consider myself an
especially big fan of R\&B or soul music but this record is so much more
than that. It's an album I keep coming back to, its appeal never dulling
and the freshness of its songs never fading. I can listen to it at any
time, in any mood, and I'll always love every second of it. When I sat
down to pit these albums against one another to produce a final ranking,
I didn't necessarily expect to find this one in the first slot, but when
it really came down to it, *Channel Orange* just felt right on top.

**Favorite Track:** "Pink Matter"

**Honorable Mentions:**

\- *Wasting Light*- Foo Fighters (2011)

\- *Ctrl*- SZA (2017)

\- *Hamilton*- Original Broadway Cast of Hamilton (2015)

\- *Melophobia*- Cage the Elephant (2013)

\- *Melodrama*- Lorde (2017)

\- *AM*- Arctic Monkeys (2013)

\- *El Camino*- The Black Keys (2011)

\- *...Like Clockwork*- Queens of the Stone Age (2013)

\- *To Pimp A Butterfly*- Kendrick Lamar (2015)

\- *Lonerism*- Tame Impala (2012)

\- *Plunge*- Fever Ray (2017)
