---
title: A Dark Night of the Soul
img: /uploads/Andy_Miller_2020-07-12.jpg
author: Andy Miller
date: '2020-07-12T06:00:00.000Z'
relatedPosts:
  - relatedPost: content/post/Daniel_Brandt_2021-10-25_post.mdx
---

6/14/2020

Writhing in distortion, I ferociously rocked my head back and forth,
hearing my neck crack and pop. It was a physical expression of the
spiritual and mental distortion inside. I had sought to seek pleasure,
it had left me high and dry, and while the few hours at the peak were
fun, the fall was a sobering, life-changing experience. It was December
19, 2017 when I had come to experience the greatest darkness I've ever
experienced. My shadow had increased tremendously and I was blatantly
exposed to the darkness within, which protruded beyond the brink of
disregard.

December 18th: and the story begins. My friend and I welcomed the night
to be one of thrill and pleasure. I needed both in order to numb my
mind, which was enveloped by the repugnance of waking into a nightmare,
and each night returning to one. A true pleasure it was to decide if I'd
prefer the nightmare of the day: stressors contained by the trap of
balancing highs; or of night: of dreams I'd "wake up" in only to find I
was still in the nightmare, just much more conscious of the demons,
interactions, and sensations that filled my dreams.

The cocaine we attained gratified my need for dopamine, and the women at
the strip club caught my attention as a simulation of the care and
solace I yearned for; my friend brought validation to my decisions. It
was a crisp cool night in December. The Colorado cold was dry, and not
fierce. It was weather to appreciate, even if you hated the cold as much
as I did. After a long day of work, the night welcomed me perfectly. I
saw the lights of downtown Denver glitter as we approached that
sensational carnival of my eye. My mind was switched to autopilot while
I sat in my personal sphere of bliss and relaxation, for the time being.
Upon arrival at the strip club, me and my friend Josh sat outside, in
his slightly worn, black 2008 Dodge Ram, as we conversed freely over an
8-ball. The line of clean, white coke traveled smoothly through the
rolled bill, off of the truck's center console, and into my right
nostril. It ran up my nose flawlessly, like an acrobat flipping in
defiance to gravity. Through the air, swinging and gliding, and yes, the
crescendo moment of it all, a flash of permissible pain to my brain from
a determined snort, cueing the ecstasy of a standing ovation from the
vivacious crowd within. My anticipation was gratified, like a child
finally departing in the seat of the most sought after roller coaster; I
was milliseconds away from the taste of the seductive narcotic at the
back of my throat.

But, my night, my high, had to come to an end---unaccompanied by any of
the vices which had aided me in distraction from the monster within. The
morning of December 19th had approached, but the darkness was still
there. I was dropped off by my friend Josh, scared to face what I had
left at home, metaphorically and now literally speaking. I began to come
down from the cocaine which had me once elevated in mind and energy. It
left me with the bar of expectations raised and with the possibility of
achieving a greater high, even further. A beautiful fairy in the night,
teasing and dancing through the forest, out of my reach, drawing me in
deeper and deeper, as she got further and further. She had lost me, and
I lost my way back.

The door to my house shut behind me and a voice in my head began to
intermittently laugh and punch out the words, "Where are you going to go
now?" I made my way to the couch and quickly turned the TV on to try and
zone out. Bouncing between "Slasher," and "Black Mirror," I struggled to
swallow the muck trapped at the top of my throat, caused by my futile
attempts to consistently snort back the cocaine residue in my nose. In
vain I tried to breathe through my swollen nostrils. Every breath was
inhaled with the thought of, "*It would have been fine had you not done
so much blow,*" and every gulp was mocked by the word "almost." Relief
was a matter of time, I thought. But time! Time was in control, I could
only wait and endure discomfort. I sat in the hands of merciless time.

On par with my chaotic thought-life, a memorable episode of "Black
Mirror" was being played. A video game creator would draw in his
employees, without their knowing, into his own virtual reality where
they could not die. He strangled one of his subjects at the snap of his
fingers--she would not die--just suffer. In his psychotic virtual
world, salvation was nowhere in sight. Time and condition warranted this
conclusion.

Discomfort and anxiety slung the door open, ironically, in order to make
themselves comfortable in the throne of chaos within me. I couldn't cool
down, I couldn't breathe right, couldn't get comfortable, couldn't get
away from my mind; I could only fall slave to my condition. Helpless, I
began to willfully contribute to a conversation prompted by the devil's
helpers who latched onto my mind and swam through the veins of my
spirit. I had welcomed in parasites who were not ready to leave,
parasites who wanted to consume me. They were addicts, sucking the life
out of me; as an addict myself, I could sympathize, however their drug
was me--I did not like this.

Before we continue with the events unfolding, I must give you some
context to the situation at hand. Growing up, I was introduced to
Christianity through my mother at a young age, but commitment and
devotion were absent. I did the dance as a younger child. I made the
prayer and I attended church every so often too, but my dad, another
dominant influence in my life, was an atheist, and furthermore the
thought of "God," to him, was ludicrous. With his beliefs and way of
life came undeniable freedom. I was, by comparison to being with my
mother, able to roam freely and do as I wished when I was with him, so
long as murder and blatant crime were not apparent. As I was shuffled
between my mother's and father's, I found that with my mom came
Christianity and strict parenting, while with my dad came... neither.
As a pre-teen, at my dad's, my friends and I would spend countless
hours getting into mischief. Why? Well, as far I had put it together,
"God," was not there. It had led me to question my beliefs, and the
authenticity of my claim as a Christian. I was a Christian by a prayer,
as absent minded as it may have been as a child, but my life showed no
indication of that. I realized that the idea of God was prevalent, and
every so often would appear as evident in my life, but for the majority
of my teens, God was not much more than a possibility, and a damper on
the experiences of drugs and sex.

On with the night we go.

Those savage parasites and I had cut straight to the core of my internal
conversation regarding faith quickly. I was coaxed into the thought of
God while in torment. Looking to heaven I exclaimed, "God! I know I am
not making it to heaven according to that book of yours!" Anger and
despair forced their way into the crevices of my mind. There wasn't
enough room. My head was on the verge of exploding. "Do you truly love
me? Because if you did I think you would've given my creation a second
thought. If you knew I wasn't going to heaven, why would you set me here
to be condemned to hell?" I questioned.

As I was prompted by these remarks, I began to deeply analyze options
between two foundations of belief. Either God was real or not. In my
head I pondered: *One possibility is that my belief in the metaphysical
is bullshit and I can abandon faith and attempt to walk in indulgence,
gratifying every need of my body possible---or opt out all
together--that doesn't sound bad right now.*

Parasite 1 nagged, "Fall to your worries and concerns; find your
salvation in permanent rest." "That's what you want anyways," Parasite 2
snickered while feeding off of my dilemma. But then I thought, *if
heaven and hell are real, well then, I will have the opportunity to
visit hell with no return and really discover what a life in hell is,
lest this not be it. And what if I choose to believe there is no such
thing as "God," yet be unable to shake the reminiscence of conviction?
What if I run with the faith of there not being a God to the end having
never found salvation by my own hands and vices? While half in
indulgence and half weighed by conviction, exhausting myself in every
attempt to lose conviction, I could potentially come to judgement day
dead in spirit and ready to be condemned... I could just run the
hamster wheel in hopes of getting somewhere. Great.*

In that moment, the walls came crashing in. I realized the questions I
was asking and dealing with had to do with eternity. There was no
escape, I was powerless to the containment of the infinite nature of
time. I thought of the episode of "Black Mirror" I had just watched. I
was a rat in a maze, with no way out.

"Run rat, run, run rat," the two Parasites taunted. I began to pace,
banging my head to express the excruciating pain I could not fully
fathom. I subconsciously danced to the drums of demons as they ran
circle after circle around me, faster, faster, in triumph they rallied.
As they did, the weaker I became. My breath became shorter, my chest
tighter, I had to throw up the sickening heat in my stomach, but I
couldn't. I felt my heart pound ferociously and with every pound, my
breath shortened. *Boom, pant... boom, wheeze... boom, whisper... boom,
gasp.* Blood rushed to my cheeks and inflated my head like I was hung
upside down. Like a sledgehammer swinging to drive a wedge through the
channels of a log, pressure built and pressed into my temples. My heart
then constricted, I felt every lost centimeter in the bind, exquisitely.
I felt insects crawling as fast as my thoughts paced, with every step of
their little legs being pricks of hot and cold flashes. I was sweating
out my energy, falling into a state of physical deprivation. I was pale,
the sockets in my skull sucked in my eyeballs.

I trudged out to my garage and grabbed my weed in hopes of peace. The
sun was now out. I'd been up for nearly 24 hours. The beautiful light
radiating from the sun made the hurt worse; shimmering it said, "If only
you could feel the harmony I cast."

The light breeze whistled, "If only you could feel as weightless as I."

"Please, I don't care what or who, just make it stop!" I exasperated.
*No answer, fine, I'll do it on my own.* In further consideration, I lit
the bowl and inhaled expectantly. And voila... I felt... even worse.

Again, Parasite 1 chimed in: "You were better off beforehand.
Congratulations dumb shit, you could've avoided this."

"Fuck this," I said. "'God,' you don't exist, and the devil is bullshit!
Leave me alone, leave me to myself, it's all just a bunch of bullshit."
Serenity brushed by me, I felt totally in control, I had established
silence for one moment. Then within seconds, like a grazing gazelle
absorbing the claws of a lion, I was pummeled to the earth, forced into
the position of submission I had felt. My body gave way, mirroring my
spirit. I fell to my knees at the loss of something. I had felt the
eviction of goodness.

Though I had been in torment, something deep, important and good, had
been evident; I only came to know this by the loss of it. I could only
pin it to being the loss of the presence of God. This was the only
viable option I had from my upbringing. As it was, He respected my
request for Him to leave, and I was left alone to deal with the demons
who couldn't care less to respect my wishes. It was one thing to become
numb to blessing but quite another to say, "I do not want it, leave." I
weighed out the declaration I had made to God. I saw that I had
abandoned hope. *Was this choice set in stone*, I asked myself in
desperation, *did you just lock your potential place in hell for good?*
I evaluated myself in the moment, reflecting on how drained I was, how
confused I was... how alone I felt. *Is this what hell is like? Does
this even touch the surface of it?*

Broken, and in need, again I looked to heaven. "Lord," I whimpered...
"Father... I repent. I do not know what I am doing, I don't understand.
I feel hopeless and lost. There is no way I can make it to heaven." I
was right, but to my surprise, peace fell upon me. Fear and anxiety were
pressed out.

I felt cleansed. I was brought back to memories as a kid. Times when me
and my brother would run laps in our driveway, laughing and yelling as
if no one could hear, playing tag for hours. Or like the time I sat in
my mom's bed, asking my grandpa over the phone to tell me the funniest
joke he knew. Times so simple, so joyful, so warm. Tears came due to
goodness for the first time. As light reached into the proximity of my
darkness, tears flooded my vision and wails of humility were sounded
out.

The ears of my spirit were awoken, "Son, get up. You are home, you are
with Me. I love you, I love you---you are loved." Symphonic notes rang
in my heart. "I will lead, and you follow," said the voice. "When I
lead, I will help you follow. We will get through this. You have Me.
First, rest," He declared. The words I heard were pressure-ridden, as
were the voice of the demons I had faced, but this was not a pressure
used to pulverize; this was the pressure of an endearing embrace.

No longer did my thoughts have the best of me. No longer was the burn of
my nose, the lack of breath, the weight of anxiety, or the inability to
swallow in control.

I had been overwhelmed by my shadow, cast by the light shining behind. I
stared at my shadow, and the Son called to set my eyes on Him. So I
have. Now, slowly, sometimes painfully, and in peace, I walk, and my
shadow follows, to the destination where the sun shines and the shadow
is no longer cast.

He said, "Let the shadow be, it is only temporary."
