---
author: Jonathan Helland
title: Netflix Won't Stop Autoplaying 13 Reasons Why This Isn't My Fault Please Help Me
date: 22 September 2020
img: /uploads/Jonathan_Helland_2020-09-22.jpg
---

I read that bananas are going extinct, and that it's all our fault. At
least, that was the headline. I didn't read the article, of course.
Article bodies are just randomly generated letters and coincidental
spaces between them. I guess the only recourse left is to regurgitate
chewed-up bananas into each other's mouth-holes like an ouroboros of
featherless pink mama birds. Or a human centipede. Gotta savor the
flavor.

Now, before we continue, I'd like to take this opportunity to formally
apologize for this entire puking of vaguely English sentences that
you're about to read. My dad didn't hit me enough when I was a kid.

That being said, a time comes in your life when you do something so
abhorrent, so utterly contrary to your inner conceptualization of
yourself in the world and the world within you that you have no choice
but to confront your own incorrigible propensity for evil. You're but a
wanderer with your shadow.

I can allude to Nietzsche because I have the big intelligence. You can't
see me, but I'm masturbating with one hand while writing this.

Maybe you screwed over your coworker to get ahead in your career; or you
watched someone get mugged from across the street and didn't call the
police; you got drunk and beat your kids; you're a 19th century yeehaw
in Texas and you scalp the natives for bounty money because this is
God's country. Yes, I reread *Blood Meridian* recently and I'm still
working through some stuff, okay? You were bullied in highschool so you
stayed home and played a lot of DOOM, but *now* you find out that
videogames actually *cause* violence so now there's just about one
option left to you. Commit a mass shooting.

The point is: you finally realize that you've never really known
yourself this whole time, that there's this entire other person inside
of you that you call your subconscious because you don't have a better
word for it, and this other person has you on puppet strings. The self
was an illusion. Free will is the opiate of the masses.

I do have a Netflix subscription, now that you mention it.

So after all of that edgy humor and existentialism, what I've done must
be obvious to you. But I'll say it anyway. I'm just gonna come clean.
Forgive me father. I finished watching the first season of *13 Reasons
Why*. For the second time. And I'm pretty fucking mad about it. How did
I get to this absolute rock bottom point in my life? Like, who watches
emphatically unenjoyable, garbage TV, thinks *Yep, that was emphatically
unenjoyable, garbage TV*, and then SITS BACK DOWN and watches it again?
I'm a masochist, is the easy answer.

Well, to find a way to cope with this shadow inside of me, I'm writing
this \-- whatever the *fuck* this is \-- as a way to pacify myself, to
convince myself that I got something meaningful out of the experience.
That it was all so worth it. The artist is compelled to attribute
meaning to their suffering by immortalizing it through works of art.
This "work of art" is gonna be some real rotting banana peels but hey --
rotting produce makes great fertilizer, right? And now you're reading
this manure. I'm a sadomasochist, is the easy answer.

*13 Reasons Why* in 2017 is a pathological evolution of the virus that
David Lynch sought to cure with *Twin Peaks* when it originally aired on
April 8^th^, 1990. This virus is the lack of audience participation in
the story through cleanly resolved mystery and plotlines. A fundamental
mechanism for this brand of reductive storytelling is the mindless
fictive violence that self-perpetuates through the audience's hunger for
entertainment and clean resolutions, which directly enacts violence on
the characters within the fiction itself.

In other word, those murder mysteries you love? Yeah, it's *you*. You're
the murderer.

You

piece of shit.

My term for this metaphysical violence transcending from your living
room into the story world itself is metaviolence. This metaviolence idea
seems to have been at the forefront of David Lynch's mind throughout his
career and especially during his *Twin Peaks* phases.

A key point of David Lynch's work is that when the core mystery of a
story (often birthed by an act of violence like an unexplained murder)
is directly resolved, we the audience no longer feel compelled to think
about the story. We cleanly shelve It away in the back of our minds and
quickly feel hunger pangs for the next piece of entertainment. This
hunger often manifests as a metaviolent urge for additional violence,
another murder instigating a new mystery for our brains to chew on. We
could have enjoyed our healthy banana snack from mommy, but instead we
crave Cheetos. There's nothing inherently wrong with that, I guess, it's
just how we are. But if you can't resist your craving for Cheetos then,
well, I guess according to Frankfurt's *Free Will and the Concept of a
Person*, you're not even a *human being* anymore.

Just kidding, that's not what it really says.

Mystery -- the exploration of the unexplained or not understood -- is at
the core of just about any story. We form a natural tension between
mystery and our craving for answers that pulls us through the story with
momentum; without the higher mystery, the unbalanced tension topples the
whole card tower and our desires fall back into hedonistic instincts
towards sex and violence, both intrinsically pornographic.

Cheetos, you fatty.

I'll caveat all this by saying I'm not inherently anti-porn. I'm not out
here whispering sweet nofap nothings so that your swollen prostate can
develop superpowers. Porn in combination with other artistic elements
can bang hard, like Bataille's *Story of the Eye*. Most porn \--
particularly porn in isolation \-- is not great. Mindless consumption to
the utmost degree.

Given the general Western acceptance of violence and tabooing of sex in
popular storytelling media, it's surprising to absolutely no one that
our pornographic desires are fed with mindless violence. It's not hard
to see how this becomes a feedback loop, either. Someone is murdered,
the murder is solved tune in next time for another one. Demand creates
the supply and so characters are born solely to be driven into the
meatgrinder. Metaviolent factory-farming.

This phenomenon is what killed *Twin Peaks* in the 90s. The mystery of
Laura Palmer's murder -- a mystery that David Lynch and co-creator Mark
Frost explicitly intended to never resolve -- was forced into resolution
in the second season by the production studio, under the pressure of
popular demand. The show quickly tanked in ratings and was not renewed
for a third season (until Lynch's Return nearly two decades later). Even
more interestingly, Lynch's filmic exploration of the Laura Palmer
character prior to her murder in *Twin Peaks: Fire, Walk with Me* was
panned by audiences, who wanted a sequel, not a deep dive into the life
of this character whose murder had already been solved for them. It was
literally booed at its Cannes premier. Film critics, of course,
retroactively started praising the film as brilliant years later once
their little Cheeto bags emptied out and they saw the banana taped on
the wall.

Fucking plebs, am I right?

I think this idea is vital: without mystery, we regress to pornography
and we stagnate, writhing around in a bathtub full of Cheeto dust like
decadent little middle-schoolers. I don't think I really need to
convince you that buffering up *RIDING DADDY UNTIL HE CUMS,
FAMILYSTROKES* in your browser's incognito mode lights the fire of
personal growth in your loins and your loins only. And yeah, that's an
actual video title -- I did *research* for this essay. No citations, you
sinner.

An episode of *Criminal Minds* or *House* or *Your Favorite TV Drama
Here* is no more fertilizing than riding daddy until he cums. Well --
not the most apt metaphor admittedly, but you see my point. Fiction is
our window into worlds in which we can explore ideas that are ordinarily
impossible -- or reprehensible. Good fiction seamlessly inserts us into
the lives of others and lets us live out the consequences of their
choices for ourselves. This is a powerful mechanism for personal growth
and change -- lies carefully constructed towards the truth. Children do
it all the time in their schoolyard games, pretending to be a simulacrum
of their parents or some other adult role model. In adulthood, they keep
doing it through increasingly popular roleplaying games like Dungeons &
Dragons in which you insert yourself directly into an emerging, communal
story developed by your friends under the faÃ§ade of your character. The
avid D&D players I've talked to regularly attest to their roleplaying
sessions as powerful catalyzing agents for their own personal growth --
D&D offers a safe environment to explore some of your problems. It's
absolutely beautiful. An isomorphic process happens in traditional stage
or cinematic acting. The parallel in videogames is obvious.

All of this suggests a meta component in which a core part of the
artwork's cognizance is its relationship between the audience and
itself. This seems like a distinctly postmodern flavor to me in that the
real meaning and value emerges through the dynamics of interaction
between things rather than the objective things considered statically by
themselves.

Oh *shit*

> oh *fuck*
>
> oh hot *diggity*

I said the magic incantation "postmodernism". Quiet \-- I think I can
hear Jordan Peterson rustling somewhere out there in the trees. We have
to get out of here before lobster-daddy starts babbling slander about
Derrida and makes us clean our rooms or something.

More modern forms of experimental fiction often favor metafiction --
fiction about fiction itself. It's hard to get away from \-- the going
black and never going back of crafting fiction. But maybe it's a little
more than a pure trope. In fact, I'd say that this metafiction idea is a
primordial form of interactive storytelling media like D&D, videogames,
and social media. Insofar as the reader-response dynamic goes in
metafiction and interactive storytelling as a whole, one could also
point out roots in oral tradition where stories \-- through lack of
being explicitly recorded \-- held a more amorphous form evolved through
intergenerational games of telephone. One could.

Metafiction stories are often puzzling and can appear overwhelmingly
abstract because it is not immediately clear that the work is so
self-referential. In this way, metafiction pieces often appear in the
form of a puzzle in which the reader/viewer must arrange the puzzle
pieces in order to glimpse the deeper meaning, the double abstraction of
the story and the story *about* the story.

In TV and film, David Lynch is famous for constructing his stories as
precisely these kinds of puzzle boxes: "The mind, being a detective,
pieces these fragments together and comes to a conclusion," says Lynch.
Many of Lynch's films contain obvious tells of metafiction, like scenes
in *Mulholland Drive* in which actors play the part of actors acting out
a scene, or in *Inland Empire* in which a character discovers their
metaphysical reality as a character in a film by observing themselves
projected on a theater screen in real time. Kind of hard to type out
cogently, isn't it?

In the literary world, Mark Danielewski's *House of Leaves* is an
obvious and popular example of metafiction, almost blatantly in puzzle
box form (one only needs to leaf through a few of the bizarrely
formatted pages and their copious footnotes to see this). *House of
Leaves* is a grandfather to so-called Alternate Reality Games (ARGs), a
kind of interactive fiction that canonically presents puzzles to
audience members on social media platforms (twitter, community forums,
etc) and then develop their stories interactively based on how the
audience engages with those puzzles. *The Blair Witch Project* and
*Cloverfield* famously used ARG elements in their ad campaigns through
the found-footage trope. *Marble Hornets* is a webseries ARG known for
popularizing the Slenderman mythos. Unfortunately, ARGs have still not
elevated to the level of high art, and their popularity with digital
advertising campaigns certainly does not help.

All of this is to say, there is a distinct flavor of interactivity to be
found in metafiction that can be traced to modern forms of interactive
fiction.

This is the point where it would have been cool to point out some
mindblowing meta component of this essay that you didn't notice until
now, right?

But I'm not clever enough for that. Please email me and let me know how
inept of a writer I am.

The thinking behind metafiction as a push towards richer audience
interactivity also pops up in other artistic mediums often less
associated with storytelling. One of my favorite recent examples is
provocateur Maurizio Cattelan's *Comedian* -- a literal banana
duct-taped to the wall of a high art gallery. I love it first of all
because it's fucking stupid as a pure aesthetic statement and \-- if you
can't tell \-- I like stupid shit. More importantly, though, this banana
is wildly polarizing and incites all sorts of aggressive commentary from
your conservative older male relatives whenever the phrase "Modern Art"
is mentioned even in passing. I argue that the true point of such
iconoclastic work lives in the reactions of those who experience it. The
artistic medium is not the banana, it's your reaction to the banana. The
inevitable discussions spawned by a banana taped to a wall in an art
exhibition hall about what actually constitutes real art have an obvious
meta flavor -- art about art. What constitutes legitimate art? What *is*
art? Questions that are hostile to resolution and also highly
interactive in the sense that your opinions can oscillate wildly when
you sit down and have a serious, genuine conversation about the fucking
banana taped to the wall.

Hilariously, the end of *Comedian*'s exhibition was wrought by a man who
took the banana off of the wall and ate it. This is a core problem
plaguing art that attempts to point its lens back at the audience -- the
audience just eats the banana. Is the joke then on the audience or the
artist? Well, the banana eater is a performance artist named David
Datuna, who claims to have done it for deeper reasons than just a joke.
The audience becomes the artist.

You can take the eating of the banana -- a literal act of violence by
the audience against the artwork -- to be the metaviolent *hoi polloi*
just not *getting it*. Which is a pretty shit take. You can interpret it
as the artist failing to execute their vision, which might have some
motes of truth. Either interpretation would be missing the point
entirely. Meta art, with its inherent interactivity, should not be
thought of so statically. It's an evolving conversation between the
artist/moderator and the audience. It's far more interesting to consider
the eating of the banana as a statement in this conversation between the
artist and the audience. An opportunity for the artist to make a
rebuttal and evolve the conversation.

I think that the audience eating the banana is the perfect light in
which to cast *Twin Peaks*. David Lynch duct-taped Laura Palmer to our
TV screens as a question: are we ready to embrace mystery and reject
mindless pornography? The audience devoured her in response. Let me be
very clear: the ingestion of Laura Palmer was an act of metaviolence by
the audience against her. Lynch makes this concrete and upsettingly
clear in his artistic response via *Twin Peaks: The Return* (which began
airing only one month after the first season of *13 Reasons Why* was
released on Netflix), the conversational progression that the banana
deserves. However, the omophagy of Laura -- the ritualistic eating of
raw flesh in Dionysian cult worship -- was not total. The banana peel
was left behind. The sensibilities of *Twin Peaks* digested into the
fatty zeitgeist of modern television and brought us to the form of some
of the greatest shows ever made. The most telling characteristic being
the shift towards long-form mysteries that arc over entire seasons.
David Lynch paved the road that shows like *True Detective*, *The
X-Files*, *Lost*, and *The Sopranos* drive on (to name only a tiny
fraction that explicitly name *Twin Peaks* as a major influence).

This brings me to *13 Reasons Why*. The banana peel has gotten moldy, a
hairy shade of green and black. It might not be safe to breathe near
this thing, all these spores in the air.

*Twin Peaks* opens with the discovery of Laura Palmer's plastic-wrapped
body. We learn almost immediately that Laura was murdered, and the
mystery of this murder propels us headfirst into the lives of the people
that knew her. Her parents, her boyfriend(s), her best friend. Our
glimpses into these people's lives only produces new mysteries, ever
expanding, revealing to us the desires, fears, and dreams of these
people. Refusing to give us closure to the fractal of mysteries keeps
the characters in the forefront of our minds, making them feel more
alive the longer we spend trying to peek behind their masques of amusing
soap opera tropes.

Through our exploration of the universe of *Twin Peaks* (especially in
*Twin Peaks: Fire, Walk with Me*), we come to understand Laura's
ambivalence and how her urge for self-destruction wins out, leading her
into the circumstances of her death at the hands of her own father. The
reveal that was never meant to be.

To echo the Log Lady, once a fire like this starts, it is very hard to
put out.

As much as Laura is a victim of heart-wrenching sexual abuse at the
hands of her father (and by proxy the haunting specter Bob, a
manifestation mindless TV violence as established by the YouTube channel
Twin Perfect in a fantastic analysis of the series), Laura is portrayed
as an aggressor in her own immolation as she leans into her job as a
prostitute at the Roadhouse, even going so far as to involve her best
friend in a particularly visceral scene of sexual degradation in *Fire,
Walk With Me*. Laura's rampant cocaine use is only additional fuel on
the fire. She rejects the help offered by those around her almost
virulently. The delicate portrayal of Laura as both victim and
victimizer provides some modicum of hope in the idea that it was
possible for Laura to resist her spiral into hell in the face of
overwhelming suffering. There was a way out. In fact, special agent Dale
Cooper (a literal vessel for the audience within the show) becomes so
preoccupied with this notion as he comes to know Laura through his
investigation into her murder that he metaphysically tries to alter her
fate at the end of *Fire, Walk with Me*: "Don't take the ring, Laura."

I've managed to avoid talking about it in detail for this long. I tried
to put it off as long as I could, but alas, dear reader. It's the end of
those nice paved city roads, everything from here on is one giant
pothole. The time has finally come for us to talk about my least
favorite porno currently on Netflix, *13 Reasons Why*. Get fucked,
idiot.

In *13 Reasons Why*, we begin with the unresolved suicide of a Hannah
Baker, a high school girl with many similarities to Laura: she lives in
a small town, she is attractive and captures the attention of all the
jocks, her parents are typical middle class folks that have enough money
to provide Hannah with all the accessories of stereotypical American
high school life. There are many more parallels that aren't worth
listing because, let's be honest, *13 Reasons Why* just isn't worth that
kind of effort.

The mystery of Hannah's suicide propels us into the lives of the
characters in the town and, primarily, life at Liberty High School --
almost glaringly parallel premises to the structure of *Twin Peaks*.
Naturally, the characters in *13 Reasons Why* seem to be just as kitschy
teen soap opera as the cast in *Twin Peaks*. Unlike *Twin Peaks*, the
characters in *13 Reasons Why* never stop seeming that way. The show
fails to grow its characters beyond the bounds of their tropes, dooming
them to endless TV static; *Twin Peaks* laid the groundwork for a damn
fine cup of coffee, *13 Reasons Why* put a fish in the percolator.

However, the central thread of Hannah's mystery is her post-mortem
revenge she enacts on the cast of characters who she believes caused her
suicide. This thread is followed by a series of tapes recorded by Hannah
in which she specifically lays out her grievances against each member of
the cast, one by one. Per Hannah's wishes, the tapes are passed around
to each of the victims of Hannah's revenge with the demand that they
listen under the threat that the tapes will be publicly released
otherwise. Many episodes on Netflix begin or end with clips of the cast
reciting canned corporate slogans about how the intention of the show is
to start *conversations*. It is clear that the creators of the show
intend for us as an audience to consider our own roles in the suffering
of others (particularly suicidal teens). We are roped into a sort of
complicity with the characters of the show who purportedly killed Hannah
under the searing gaze of the actors playing characters that offer no
sense of growth, no lessons learned, only wallowing in the wanton pain
inflicted by Hannah and on Hannah herself.

In this sense, Hannah Baker is not just a specific girl in a high school
with problems specific to her life, she is a fictional archetype, a
symbol who, by blaming the subjects of her tapes, insinuates the
audience as the perpetrators of her suicide. Hannah is thus every girl
who suffers in the high school cesspool and lives the suicidal urges
that follow. She is the crushingly hopeless central message of the
entire show: none of this was your fault. Your suffering was entirely in
the hands of others, you cannot rise above it. No one else can help you
because it is everyone else's fault. Hannah unpeels the banana of Laura
Palmer and chews her up, all the while staring back at the audience like
a gorgon. But this is not a full understanding of the reflexive cultural
and artistic response that *13 Reasons Why* synthesized in response to
*Twin Peaks* as a meta art piece similar to Cattelan's *Comedian*.

A fuller picture emerges through the criticism that the show \-- in
particular Hannah Baker's character \-- received posthumously.

In spite of its immense popularity, *13 Reasons Why* received criticism
from some reviewers and medical professionals for glorifying suicide
through the heroization of a character that refuses to acknowledge their
role in their own victimhood, exacerbating the risk of copycat suicide
in those who may be at risk for suicide themselves. In other words, it
has been argued that the show poses a physical threat to certain members
of its audience. Of course, a causal link between violent media and acts
of violence against oneself or others has never been established and I
am not claiming that it should be. However, the idea that *13 Reasons
Why* could pose any form of threat against the audience -- even merely
psychologically -- is intriguing. Whether the creators of the show
intended physical or psychological threat against the audience or not
(of course they didn't), popular fiction should be respected as having a
certain life beyond its creators in the way that it lives in the minds
of its audience. In this case, the idea of legitimate threat against the
audience is a new modality in metaviolence. A new modality that is dual
to the metaviolence of *Twin Peaks*, where it was the audience that
physically harmed the characters. The masticated Laura Palmer banana is
spat back at us through the mouth of Hannah Baker, "live and in stereo".

I swear to god, if I have to hear Hannah Baker say "live and in stereo"
one more time, I'm going to call a 24/7 suicide hotline and get some
serious professional help from people who really care.

Stephen King purportedly said of Stanley Kubrick's film adaption of *The
Shining*, "I think he set out to make a film that hurts people." As much
as I don't like Stephen King, I can't help but remember this quote when
I view *13 Reasons Why* in the way that I described it above. I also
can't help but think of the popular horror trope of a sentient and
maleficent entity emerging from a TV screen and harming its viewer;
Scott Derrickson's *Sinister,* Gore Verbinski's *The Ring,* and David
Cronenberg's *Videodrome*, all riff on this idea. Some of David Lynch's
later work like *Mulholland Drive* (which reportedly began as a spinoff
of *Twin Peaks* itself) and *Inland Empire* even centers around
characters that experience psychological and physical harm through their
failure to distinguish between the reality of their lives and the
reality of cinema.

So, where does the conversation go after Hannah Baker mama birds the
Laura Palmer banana back at us? Well, *13 Reasons Why* got renewed for
three additional seasons, so clearly someone thinks there's more
conversation to be had. And by conversation, I mean money. What could
possibly be the premise, you ask? Does Hannah Baker pull a Jesus and off
herself three more times so we can get thirty-nine more reasons why? Not
exactly. Yeah, that's right, I watched more than just the first season
\-- I like to self-flagellate, apparently. No matter how much I scrub at
my skin in this mildewy shower, I can never get *clean*.

Instead of fifty-two reasons why, the characters left alive are made to
suffer for our viewing pleasure; more girls are raped, a kid shoots
himself in the head and survives as a cripple, a guy's girlfriend
suffers a mental breakdown and is institutionalized before being
immediately written off of the show, and the yearbook photographer is
sodomized with a broom handle in the boy's bathroom by an evil jock and
then tries to shoot up the school dance with an assault rifle. In season
four, everyone's gay. The eternal cycle of bananas.

So, what's the resolution to all of this? Does anything I've written
coalesce into something \-- anything \-- meaningful? Is *13 Reasons Why*
accidental art?

It's all a mystery to me.
