---
author: Daniel Butler
title: Relationship Status
date: 1 February 2021
img: /uploads/Daniel_Butler_2021-02-01.jpg
---

Choosing your lifelong mate

The process of choosing your spouse is a daunting one, and one of the
most important choices in your entire life. The idea that you must
choose someone to spend the next 60 years with really is an impossible
task. Why should I, a person in their 20's, or 30's, have to make such a
big decision? In a world filled with indecision, especially among young
men, it is especially hard. With access to the knowledge of the entire
human race at our fingertips, and the increased exposure of celebrities
and their success pushed on us every day, we become uncertain of our own
decisions and wisdom in life. We tell ourselves: "If I haven't decided
on the person, and character, I want to be by the time I'm 22 I'm behind
the curve. If I have not chosen a successful career by 25, I am behind
the curve. If I haven't chosen a lifelong mate by the time I am 30, then
I am behind the curve." As we see more of the world around us, and have
access to more knowledge, we begin to highlight our own inadequacies and
weaknesses. And if I feel unprepared, ignorant, and behind in society, I
don't trust myself to choose the person I'll spend forever with.

Perhaps you even feel confident about yourself, or confident in God to
bring the right person into your life, but find yourself single, or in
an unhappy relationship, and still searching for the one. This article
was intended to either of the persons described above. While you may not
fully relate to all those characteristics, chances are you have had
similar feelings before. This is not designed to walk you through
statistics on the average age people get married, or how it is highly
likely that you will find someone and will not be single forever. This
is purely written about my personal experience and the wisdom I have
learned along the way: from God, from my wife, and from fellow men I
look up to. This article will hit home for many young men out there, but
I want to speak to women as well and I hope much can be learned for all
readers. We will follow the general trajectory of love: single, dating,
committed relationship, engaged, and finally, married. Let's jump in.

**Singleness (Searching)**

Putting yourself in the right place

One of the first steps to tackling singleness is proximity to members of
the opposite sex. In 2020 and 2021, during the era of social media and
COVID, this looks like dating apps for many people. I am not here to
bash that method, quite the opposite. I think many beautiful
relationships have begun on Hinge, Bumble, or Farmers Only, whatever
your app of choice is. Just be sure you are confident in your own
identity, self-worth, and your standards before jumping headfirst into
the vicious world of dating apps. The way I met my wife was through
serving others at our local church. Regardless of the way you serve and
volunteer, in your community, church, or on mission trips to other
countries, you are putting yourself in a place to find someone who
values that as well. There is something that speaks to your soul when
you are serving others with a cheerful heart. The desire to find someone
already influences all aspects of your life, so do not guilt yourself in
questioning how pure your motives are. There are many places to find a
partner and God works through all areas of your life, but I can tell you
finding someone at church is so good. While it does not guarantee
someone of good character unfortunately, it shows they prioritize their
heart and their soul, and are attempting to answer the most important
question in life, "What happens after I die?". "Who will I marry?" is
only the second most important question. If someone is well on their way
of answering the first, it creates a beautiful framework and worldview
in which to conduct your relationship. Tackling sex has the potential to
be hard enough without arguing over various religious beliefs on it.
Tackling relationship/gender roles can be hard enough without
disagreeing on the purpose of life. Your time in singleness should focus
on answering the first question.

Becoming the person your future spouse is looking for.

We talk all the time about what we want out of a relationship. "I want
him to workout, be over 6' tall, make me laugh, and have a kind heart."
"I want her to workout, have pretty eyes, comfort me, and challenge me."
We all have different desires and standards for our future relationships
yet rarely focus on our own character. "Am I becoming the person my
future spouse is looking for?" I may want someone who is funny, kind,
hardworking, intellectual, toned, and has a strong faith. I can
guarantee you that someone who is all those things is going to have
extremely high standards. You better be able to make people laugh, have
deep friendships with those around you, be successful in your job,
always be learning new things, always be working out and eating healthy,
and always growing in your faith with God. While it does not directly
translate like that, you get the idea. Begin to focus on yourself and
put yourself in a healthy place in all aspects of life. I would begin
with these areas of your life: spiritual, emotional, social, physical,
career, and mental health.

Standards

After working on those first two, you are now at a healthy point to talk
about what YOU want out of the relationship. I want to pause and say
that love and relationships do not follow a formula and sometimes at
your darkest and most unhealthy point, the love of your life pops into
your world. Many times, however, we sit around waiting for this person
when we should be growing and learning in our singleness. Allow yourself
to be open to love, even if you don't feel perfect, worthy, or ready.
This is how God loved us, allow in His love and it will make it easier
to let others love you as well. Anyways back to what you want out of the
relationship/person. This can be summed up with the term "standards."
High standards, low standards, weird standards, everyone has an opinion
on your standards. You need to know that standards are a good thing, a
necessary thing. You should have a list written down with things that
you are looking for in a significant other. This is especially helpful
if in the past, you find yourself dating people who do not actually meet
your standards. Write them down, especially the true deal breakers, and
use that list to find someone with good character.

Chemistry

The other ingredient for finding a person to date is chemistry. This
does not need to be forced or taught or written down. Chemistry is
natural, unforced, and simply beautiful. It can be defined in many ways.
Most people think it means similar interests and hobbies, similar
approaches to life, or similar humor. Based on the relationships I have
seen, including my own, there is no formula that can tell you whether
you will have chemistry with someone. The thing to note here is to allow
for chemistry to happen. When someone does not seem like your type, or
fit your lifestyle, or you do not understand them, allow chemistry to
wash away your fears and reservations. Sometimes things are just meant
to be and feel at the mercy of it, rather than steering the ship. For
control freaks like me, this is one of the hardest aspects of love and
relationships. It is necessary that you let chemistry, and God, work in
your relationships, otherwise love becomes calculated and robotic.

I think it is important to note that I did a couple other things in my
personal life before I asked out Mikala (my now wife) on our first date.
I reviewed these things as necessary before I was willing to be in a
relationship. These were personal decisions, but I would recommend them
to men reading this.

1\. I stopped my porn addiction. That needed to end, I felt dirty, let
alone how it distorts your view of women and sexuality. While I fail
because I'm a human, I made an important step towards purity.

2\. I focused on my relationship with God. That meant more time
volunteering, more time at church, more time around community,
etc.Â Specifically, for me it took on the form of worship, and learning
to pour out my heart to God, especially when I felt lonely.

3\. I worked on my confidence when talking to women. Turns out they are
not so scary to talk to, although still just as complicated. While the
underlying sexual tension of most opposite sex relationships sometimes
makes it hard to be genuine, you should let that motivate you, not
paralyze you.

I want to briefly talk about my life as a single guy. I genuinely
enjoyed life, to the fullest, and I never let my singleness hold me back
from what God called me to. Sometimes, I would suffer from loneliness
still, since God created people to be social and relational creatures,
but that was not my identity. I was always looking and searching for
potential girls but never letting my heart fall until I found the right
one. Sometimes, in a world of date after date, and girl after girl,
people could benefit from doing this as well. I hope you spend your
singleness growing and enjoying your autonomy, two things that look
drastically different after you get into a relationship.

**Dating (Discovery)**

When you collide with someone who better understands you than others do,
is serving alongside you in the community, pursues Christ, and there is
something special just about being around them and your life may never
be the same. Meeting someone special like this usually looks like a
collision. It seems unplanned, random, chaotic, and destructive to your
former life, but so intense that it is hard to look away. When a force
like this enters your bubble of life, be willing to take a leap and
pursue that person. The quote from the incredible movie, *The Secret
Life of Walter Mitty*, comes to mind

"To see the world, things dangerous to come to, to see behind walls,
draw closer, to find each other and to feel. That is the purpose of
life."

The joy in adventure that Walter Mitty feels is the same joy that people
experience whenever a new relationship is beginning. Let yourself
discover, not only that other person, but yourself, and a whole new
world that has been opened. Mikala was a dancer, musician, ex-hippie,
indie movie lover, and alternative music expert. I had experienced zero
of these growing up and so the most attractive parts of her were the
things I least understood. While you may find things in common that
bring you together, you will find that in the mystery is where love
grows. Do not be afraid of the difference. Even if you share zero
interests and hobbies together. Turns out that you do not need to share
activities for a relationship to flourish.

I am such a strong supporter of becoming close friends with someone
before dating them. While this does not always happen, there is
something beautiful about it and it honestly causes a lot less breakups.
True friendship is vulnerable, revealing, and honest. If you know
someone to that level before dating them, there are a lot less
surprises.

Dating for Mikala and I had plenty of ups and downs. It started with
Mikala saying no initially after I asked her out. One downside of the
whole friendship before dating method is the dreaded friend zone. I hope
my story is proof that even a 2-year friend zone can be broken and turn
into a beautiful relationship. You can imagine I was crushed after
working up the courage over a month to ask her out and having her say
no. Fortunately she reconsidered and by the next day was willing to go
out on a date. We set something up for the next week and I nervously
prepared and talked extensively to Josiah and David about my feelings.
These guys were my roommates at the time and good friends. I scheduled a
takeout order at an Italian restaurant and after picking up Mikala from
her house, and picking up the food, we headed to a park to watch the
sunset from the back of my jeep. The atmosphere was perfect so naturally
I went in for the kiss, thankfully it was reciprocated. Everything felt
so organic and wonderful and the next few months were filled with
incredible discovery. Every week it felt like new growth was occurring
in the relationship, whether it was emotional, physical, or spiritual,
we grew to really know one another.

**Committed Relationship (Growth)**

I wrote this next section during a jumble of thoughts that came rushing
to my mind. This turned into a structure that is both necessary and
terrible at the same time. While the below "tests" are so crucial for
helping determine your future spouse, they could also destroy it at the
same time, and not for a good reason. I talk about this more at the end
but for now take in the wisdom of this section. These are written as
questions you ask yourself when you are considering whether your
significant other should become your spouse. This is less about the
daydreaming that happens in a relationship and more about a serious and
sober conversation with yourself, and your trusted friends/family, about
the future.

1.  The Hesitancy test -- Am I hesitant because of my significant other
    or hesitant because of the weight of the decision? The former can
    come in two forms. There is something your partner has that makes
    you hesitant OR there is something your partner lacks that makes you
    hesitant. Every person will have at least one of these and so you
    should not treat it as a deal breaker but rather as a conversation,
    between you and your partner, between you and God, between you and
    trusted friends/mentors around you. The latter, regarding decision
    anxiety: sometimes you just need to make a gut decision. It is
    extremely easy for men to avoid the responsibility and weight of
    such a big decision by always calculating various variables and
    pathways in life. Once you pull the trigger and propose to her, you
    collapse all those variables down to one pathway. That makes life
    simpler in a way, in a way that men can better understand and thrive
    in. It is unhealthy to be living your life without a clear path
    forward. Ask yourself this question: "Am I hesitant of marriage
    because of my significant other or hesitant because of the weight of
    the decision?"

2.  The Offspring Test - Another good thermometer to add to your list is
    children. Now assuming you want to procreate, think about this: "Am
    I ok with this person raising my children?" You should phrase it in
    this way, almost a selfish but necessary view. "Am I ok with the
    values, the lifestyle, the religion, the politics, the personality
    that your significant other has?" Because those are the things that
    will be directly spoken over your child. You better trust your
    partner with your entire offspring. This is not to say that you
    should not marry someone who isn't ready to raise a child. It is
    crucial to understand that people grow in maturity and beliefs
    between getting married and having kids. However, you can typically
    look at someone and say to yourself, "While they aren't ready for
    this now, I'm not either, I trust them to raise my kids in the
    future". Ask yourself this question: "Do I trust my partner to raise
    my children well with the correct values, beliefs, and character?"

3.  The Legacy Test -- Am I ok with the legacy my partner will be a part
    in creating? The impact you have on your family, your community,
    your church, and even the world at large, will be directly affected
    by your spouse. Whatever you leave behind in this world when you are
    6 feet underground, will be created from you AND your spouse. For
    infinity, the two of you will be connected. Ask yourself this
    question: "Will my partner build something with me that is worthy of
    a long-lasting legacy?"

4.  The Lifestyle Test - Will you become a pastor and help hundreds of
    hopeless souls? You'll need your spouse to be on board. Will you
    become a politician set out to make the lives of people better? You
    will need your spouse on board. Will you work extra-long hours for
    30 years in order to have an extravagant retirement? You will need
    your spouse on board. Ask yourself this question: "Am I willing to
    sacrifice my lifestyle for my partner and are they willing to
    sacrifice for me?"

5.  The Parent test -- "Am I ok with my significant other turning into
    his/her parents as they age?" While this does not happen to
    everyone, it is our default. There is a great book by Gary Chapman
    called *Things I wished I'd known before I got married*. One of the
    many things mentioned in this influential book is that without
    active choices, you will become your parents when you are older. If
    we are passive about our growth and path in life, we will most
    likely turn into a version of our parents. If his/her parents have
    good qualities, you can look forward to those. If his/her parents
    have some bad qualities, you need to either recognize that and be ok
    with it or be proactive about tackling it early with your spouse.
    This is why it is a such a big deal for your significant other to
    meet your parents, not only to seek the affirmation from your
    parents but to seek your partner's affirmation and approval as well.
    Ask yourself this question: "Am I ok with my partner turning into
    their parents when they grow old and if not, are their mutually
    agreed upon things that will have to change?"

6.  The Trust test -- "Do you trust your partner to continue to love you
    and grow with you?" Love is an action, not a feeling. Thus, it is
    always possible to love someone even though you grow into a new
    person throughout the years, sometimes apart in certain ways. The
    goal of this test is, do you trust your significant other enough to
    understand this and be willing to stay the course. Ask yourself this
    question: "While I do not know where I will live in 20 years, what
    my career will look like, or what my passions will be, can I
    envision my partner beside me?" Ask yourself this question: "Am I
    willing to continue to love my partner even if they completely
    change and is my partner willing to do the same for me?"

7.  The Mentor Test -- Hopefully, you had people in your life that are
    speaking truth and love into you. I believe while family is an
    important part of this, that there must be someone else outside of
    your family that is doing this. Whether it is an actual mentor
    (which I would recommend) or some deep friendships with peers, you
    should be asking their honest opinion of your significant other.
    While they may not know him/her that closely, they know you well,
    and they know what you need in life. Ask yourself this question: "Do
    the people I trust in my life approve of a marriage with this
    partner?"

8.  The voice of God test -- Last but not least, look to God for
    direction. When there is a God out there that literally knows the
    future and wants the best for you, and He is available to talk to
    whenever, we should probably utilize that resource when making this
    huge decision. Focus on the different ways that God speaks: Prayer,
    Scripture, Community, and Circumstance. What has God told you in
    prayer and are you truly listening or just talking? What does the
    Bible say about marriage? What does marriage look like in your godly
    community around you? And finally, are doors being opened and
    pathways being built that are leading you towards marriage? Ask
    yourself this question: "Do I hear the voice of God in this
    decision?\"

Please note that it is extremely hard for me to write a list of tests
like this. My logical left brain pushes me towards these types of
equations when deciding to marry someone is far from that. I want to
note that even writing these down develops in me some anxiety. That is
because a person is not math, love is not perfect, and you will never
get the "right" answer when applying math to this decision. In some way,
the person falls short, the relationship has flaws, the timing is not
perfect. So, forget everything I just said, kind of... Use them as tools
to help guide you but not as perfect formulas. Many people reading this
already understand this fact and can follow their heart with ease. But
many people are like me and tend to follow their brain easier. Turns out
you need both a heart and a brain to make a good decision.

There are some important final notes in my own personal journey toward
proposal and engagement. Firstly, Josiah and Shelley got engaged. When
your close friend takes that leap of faith and is willing to propose, it
helps pave the path for others to follow. We will touch on this later
but to lead courageously is a rare thing, but it always helps those who
follow in your path. I will tell you that proposing to Mikala was a lot
less scary because I knew that if my friends could take that leap, so
could we. Finding leaders in your life to follow and being a leader to
others is deeply important in relationships and society today. Secondly,
I reflected heavily on my history with Mikala. Your history together is
huge. Sometimes we get so freaked out about an engagement when we have
years of memories to look back on. Years of creating life together,
growing together. Sharing jokes and memories and love. The future
becomes visible when you reflect on the past. Thirdly, I felt very
strongly that Mikala needed me to propose. This is the craziest one. The
church talks all the time about how you are supposed to sacrifice for
your wife. This was my first sacrifice for her. I was not ready to get
married and was content to wait a couple more years, yet Mikala was
ready in her heart and that meant me sacrificing my timeline for hers.
It is wild to think about but sometimes you must lock yourself into a
decision and then operate within those parameters. This was completely
against my personal decision-making method but sometimes you must do
stuff like that. This now leaves me with zero other options, I must make
my marriage work, there is no second guessing, no other girl options.
Once she says "I Do", she is the ONE God chose for you. You no longer
have to wonder if you made a mistake or if this was not God's plan. Once
you are married, that becomes God's plan, and He wants your marriage to
last forever. And that is a good thing, now you are free to love her
fully and build a life together. Finally, I felt God tell me to take a
leap of faith in 2019 very clearly and that manifested itself in a
proposal. Josiah had introduced me to the Word of the Year idea in late
2018 and so I was excited to choose my first ever Word of the Year for
2019. During some time in prayer, the word Risk was dropped into my mind
and heart. I was beyond excited for what this year would hold, and I
could not wait to do some crazy things. 11 months later in November and
nothing risky had occurred, the entire year. Sure, there were small
changes and small steps, but I knew deep down that was not what God had
meant. So, I began to come around to the idea that maybe God wanted me
to propose this year, even though that was not my plan. Allowing myself
to grapple with these feelings, along with the ones shared above,
eventually grew me and allowed me to listen to what God had in store for
me. Never underestimate what the God of universe has in store for you,
it is definitely not a boring and normal life that follows your plans.

**Engaged (Evolution)**

When you get engaged there are some emotions that you experience
throughout your engagement journey. Each of these emotions reveals
itself in both a "positive" face and a "negative" face. Emotions
themselves cannot be characterized as negative and positive but you will
see what I mean.

The first phase is the Excitement/Shock phase. This is where you are on
the top of the world and sharing your new relationship status
everywhere, not just Facebook. You cannot wait for everyone to see the
ring, the pictures, the story of the proposal. It is fresh, exciting,
and everyone loves you. The other side of the coin is utter shock. What
just happened? Am I really locked in forever, like FOREVER? Oh shit,
this is forever. These are real and good emotions to hash out. We are
meant to feel, not to suppress.

The second phase is Planning/Questioning. This is where you begin to
plan not just the wedding but your futures. While some couples have long
engagement timelines, they are still planning their future if they are
not planning their wedding. Thinking of what life will be like, where to
live together, where to spend holidays. Then for those planning their
wedding, it is what colors to have and what venue is within budget but
allows for all our family and friends to be there. The flip side of the
coin is questioning. While you are no longer in shock of the engagement,
you have now spent actual time considering the weight of the decision
and you do so completely logically. You question whether this was a
smart idea. Your partner just made a crazy demand for the wedding you
completely disagree with or some dream of theirs on where they want to
live that was not revealed beforehand. You begin to see that you will
have to either steamroll, sacrifice, or compromise with your partner for
the rest of your life. That leads to a lot of questioning, especially of
yourself and your ability to make good decisions in life. This is once
again a good emotion that needs to be sorted through. Sometimes you must
remind yourself of all the things you thought about in our previous
section on committed relationships.

The final phase is Resolve/Resignation. You are resolved to commit to a
wedding and move forward with officially marrying your fiancÃ©e. You have
resolved to make this last a lifetime and you are committed to him/her
forever. You resolve in front of your family/friends at the ceremony to
always love and protect them. At the same time, you resign yourself to a
life with this person. No other option, no back doors. Cheating is now
adultery, not just breaking someone's heart that you are dating, but now
breaking their entire life. This feeling isn't necessarily dread, but
more a deep and sober understanding that this is forever, and you have
to make it work. It is intimidating but motivating. Resignation but
resolve.

I wrote on these emotions because I felt them, and the internal battle
is sometimes exhausting. You find yourself reverting to old habits or
methods of escape for your brain. I would listen to old music from high
school thinking of the "good old days" or go on long night drives by
myself to clear my head. This is part of the transition, you could call
it closure in a way, of your old life and expectation of things to come.
There are such deep emotions in old habits and good memories from the
past. These do not get erased from your past, but they are killed in a
way. This applies to negative emotions from the past as well and while
they are never erased from your past they do die. Just know that you are
on the right path whatever you experience during this unique season. Do
not rush what is only a temporary time that you can never return to.

**Marriage (Stability)**

Finally, we are now at the season of marriage, or more like the lifelong
season of marriage. If you have been lucky enough to make it to this
point, you saw earlier how long the road is, and now the journey has
just begun. Now with almost a year of marriage under my belt I consider
myself an expert on the topic, filled with wisdom beyond my years.
Fantastical notions aside, there have been a couple things I have
noticed about marriage that I have been wanting to share.

Identity

One reason the transition into marriage can be a struggle is the newly
found shared identity. While your shared identity, US versus ME, has
been forming throughout your relationship, marriage is a whole other
beast. Your spiritual life is now US, your finances are now US, your
happiness/sadness is now shared. Anything that your partner experiences
will be shared even if there is a healthy balance between individual and
couple. Keep in mind there is a balance needed, and you cannot fully
lose yourself. That being said, everything truly is a shared identity.
If you are politically outspoken on social media, your spouse will be
attached to whatever you say. Whether it is fair or not, people will
lump him/her into the same category as you. Keep in mind that your
actions directly impact another human being, and they must live with the
consequences and successes of that. For me this has meant thinking more
before speaking and learning to make decisions for both of us.

Living together

Another reason the transition into marriage can be difficult is
cohabitation. Suddenly you realize your spouse does not like to do
certain chores or goes to bed really late/early. These are things that
can be noticed while dating but it is not the same and here is why.
Marriage is a lifelong commitment and that means comfortability. In one
swoop you lose one of the biggest motivators in your life, sexual
tension. This is the reason why you dress well, the reason you wear
perfume, the reason you work on becoming the best version of yourself.
This comfortability will lead people to change their habits, and in some
ways, is impossible to predict ways. Even when living together with
someone before marriage, it doesn't accurately show how people will act.
This is not meant to instill fear into you that your significant other
will change when you marry them. The reason why you married them is that
you trust them. You trust that they will continue to love you, sacrifice
for you, and grow with you. However, it is still important to know that
you must cross this bridge of cohabitation, and you will cross it
together.

Family

Probably one of the hardest aspects of marriage, at least for some
couples and for us. Your spouse's parents are now automatically your
parents. There is a new list of family expectations to follow, including
holidays, family vacations, birthdays, traditions, and lifestyle. You
must decide together how you will interact with your families and how to
integrate family into their marriage. Now there are so many benefits as
well, and the list of people that love and care about you grows. Even
though there are many positives, it is still change, and change is hard
especially when it comes quickly.

Date your spouse

You must continue to date your spouse. We talked earlier about the
comfortability that is experienced in marriage. The importance of being
uncomfortable, excited, and challenged becomes more evident within
marriage. Dating someone is all these things and you must find a way to
incorporate them into your marriage. This can especially be a struggle
for men who find themselves content and comfortable, no longer needing
to pursue women. You may feel that way, but it is the quickest way to an
unhappy wife and while you can blame her for her feelings, it does not
change them. Even if the heart is not in it at the beginning, it will
follow. This requires stepping outside of your comfort zone and taking
leaps of faith. Humans quickly grow stagnant when life does not change
and thus your relationship with each other must change, your lifestyle
must change, your faith must change.

There are many more areas of life that could be addressed when it comes
to marriage but the above is sufficient for now. This journey has just
begun for me and this will not be the last time I write about it either.
To finish out this section I do want to speak directly to the men
briefly. There are 4 actions that you must undertake as you become a
husband. These are taken directly from the Men's Fraternity study and
passed down to me from my father. This study was something that a bunch
of us guys went through together during lifegroup. If you are a man
looking for some more direction in life, grab some buddies and go
through this study. Here are the 4 main tenants:

Reject Passivity -- To step up every time because you always have a role
to play

Accept Responsibility -- To understand the heavy weight on your
shoulders and to also admit your imperfection as a man

Lead Courageously -- To forge a path forward for your family and your
community by taking the first step and serving others

Live for the greater Reward -- To decide every day that your life will
be an echo of Christ and His love and salvation

**Summary**

I am reminded of myself, 10 years ago, dreaming about who I would end up
with. What would she look like? What would her hair color be? Her eye
color? Would she like to dance or sing in the shower? Would she like me?
Would she love me? We all think about such things because such things
are important to think about. Make no mistake that love is in our DNA.
Not only our capacity to love others but our desire to be loved
ourselves. God is a God of love, unconditional love with no strings
attached. The kind of love we want from our spouse and the kind of love
we strive to give. Let yourself daydream of that love but be willing to
make it happen as well. Marriage is not 50% and 50%. Your spouse does
not complete you and it is selfish to put that weight on them. Marriage
is 100% and 100%, two individuals living as both individuals and
partners, stubborn enough to not quit. Stubborn enough to keep loving. I
pray for you, the reader, to have the best marriage this life can hold.
In the meantime, I'll be here, whatever here is. Living life for Mikala
and for God, having the same relationship status on Facebook for the
next 60 years: "Married".
