---
title: El Shaddai
author: David Grisham
img: /uploads/David_Grisham_2021-09-09.jpg
date: '2021-09-09T00:00:00.000Z'
---

> "GAME THEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF RESOURCE ALLOCATION IN THE
> INTERPLANETARY FILE SYSTEM" has been accepted\
> ETD Administrator \<etdadministrator@proquest.com> Tue, 27 July 2021,
> 8:26 PM to me\
> \
> Dear David,Congratulations. Your submission, 12224 has cleared all of the
> necessary checks and will soon be delivered to ProQuest for
> publishing.Regards, Colorado School of Mines Administrator

was it worth it?

absolutely. but it took a long time to come to that conclusion

***

Josiah was actually the one to find IPFS in the first place. I sent him
email-rants detailing my plans for a shared music server. See, we wanted
a system where a group of us could share music on a Linux server (read:
an old, sad, broken laptop that I plugged in at home and kept on the
Internet at all times). It'd be especially cool if our computers could
directly exchange music, rather than having to go through my abused
laptop. Something like a torrent. But a torrent is a static set of files
\-- you can't add, remove, or change the shared data without creating a
new torrent. So I wanted something like BitTorrent, but with a dynamic
set of files.

He responded to one such email-rant with:

> 9 July 2016, 12:42 PMLove your emails David. They always have a lot of personality.So I changed the copy location, but my home directory just has
> "~/queue". I'm not sure that this is the case for everyone, but
> something I thought I would mention. With the search functionality,
> there are some permission problems with trying to search music\_admins
> library. *I found a couple plugins for beets that might be helpful for
> our purposes: Chromaprint/Acoustid Plugin and **IPFS Plugin**.* Check
> em out. Let me know if you have anything else.-Josie

Not long after, I found Juan's now-classic Stanford Seminar talk
entitled *IPFS and the Permanent Web*. I was immediately excited by the
project; signed on with my graduate professor DJ Yang, whose research
group focused on Game Theory and Networks; and emailed Juan about
contributiong via my masters research. My first semester in DJ's group
would be the Fall semester of 2018.

My thesis proposal was accepted in May of 2018. The focus would be on
implementing incentive systems into Bitswap, the block exchange engine
of IPFS, and analyzing those incentives through a game-theoretic lens. I
proposed an ambitious combination of theoretical analysis, numerical
simulations, and real-world implementation.

Before and during all of this, my mom and I had been sifting through the
wreckage that my dad had left of our lives. Growing up, my parents had
always promised to pay for my school as long as I lived to my potential.
As much as my mom wanted to follow through with the agreement, there was
simply no way after the destruction he caused. I needed to find a way to
support myself.

> Tue, 3 April, 2018, 11:53 PMYou applied for the Cryptoeconomics Research Intern or Master Thesis
> position 5 days ago and Clément Lesaege from Kleros responded with
> interest.

I was offered a research internship in Portugal, to work with Kleros on
a decentralized arbitration system. Kleros existed in the same sphere as
IPFS, which made it an amazing opportunity in so many ways.

But I had to pay my way there; to get my visa, I had to pay off my
tuition so I could obtain my transcript; I had no money.

I applied for Lyft, because Uber had an application fee. To pass the car
inspection with Lyft, I dug out just enough change to buy a replacement
taillight bulb for my car. On 6 July 2018, I gave my first Lyft ride.

> Thu, 21 March 2019, 2:19 AMHi Clément,I wanted to email you regarding my research internship that's been
> pending for awhile now. First off, I want to you know that my time has
> been dedicated to getting to Portugal to work with Kleros -- I never
> wanted to take this long to get out there, and have been trying my
> best to make it happen over the past year. However, about a year
> before the internship my life/financial situation took a pretty
> drastic turn. Because of this, it's not as easy to take advantage of
> opportunities like this one as it used to be.I think, at this point, I need to focus on acquiring the skills and
> resources to rebuild these financial parts of my life. As such, I'm
> afraid I have to respectfully decline the position as a research
> intern with Kleros. I sincerely apologize for this taking so long -- I
> had every intention of making this happen, but it's become clear to me
> that my circumstances require a different approach.I appreciate the time you put into helping me through the process to
> get there. I hope that I didn't set you back too far with all of this.
> I wish you and Kleros all the best, I think the work you guys are
> doing is exciting and important!Regards,David Grisham

I started my first real job, as a software engineer with Inspire
Fitness, in April of 2019.

Zach threw me into the fire immediately. I had to learn how to write
real-world code, and fast. I hadn't really done that before. I'd been
too busy perfecting every detail of my development environment and
obsessing over the 'right way' to program. The former was a blast and
I'd never take that back. The latter was my biggest hindrance in
becoming marketable. I thought Haskell was The Way, despite it being
rarely used in production and generally impractical. Now I was working
in Go. Very minimal, simple, practical language.

I worked with Zach and our small team to rewrite the fully automated
live exercise class broadcast system. Once Zach stepped into a less
technical role, I was the primary maintainer of the entire system.

I realized that being a software engineer wasn't just for people who
couldn't cut it in the research world. Implementing sensible,
maintainable code that solves a specific problem is a skill that takes a
lot of time and experience to build.

Throughout all of this, I was still "working on my masters". I'd start
getting momentum, do a couple of calls with DJ, then fizzle out.

*I'm going to finish this thesis.*

*Jesus, this costs how much per semester?*

*I already have a job, do I really need to do this?*

*Yes, I do. But man, this is hard.*

*Am I even doing anything valuable?*

*I haven't had consistent communication with anyone at Protocol Labs in
so long.*

*I take so long to update DJ that he consistently needs to be reminded
what exactly we're working on.*

*Will DJ just stop taking my calls at some point?*

*How many times am I going to have to rewrite these damn simulations to
keep updated with Protocol Labs's testbeds?*

*I'd rather work on The Attic, it's so much more fun.*

*How many people will I have to admit to that I didn't finish this
thing?*

Crystal and I started dating in June 2020. I continued to make mild
progress on my thesis, but not to the point of finishing. In April 2021,
I set an insane goal to finish the thesis by the spring semester
deadline. I had two weeks.

***

*Ayin Tovah*

***

**Routine is important, but finding it is hard.**

> *Virtue is the golden mean between two vices, the one of excess and
> the other of deficiency.*

In this bold attempt to finish something I hadn't in years, I realized I
would have to largely destroy the structure and routine of my life. I'd
been working on the thesis, but this would be a complete overhaul. It
would be a dynamic process of discovery. I'd have to figure out what
worked, and what didn't, all among the fluctuating factors of mood,
life, having a girlfriend, etc. What worked on one day, might not work
the next. There would be core aspects of course. The constantly shifting
building blocks that I'd use to structure my life during the thesis
included:

**Exercise**. I did my best to establish a habit of swimming when I
could. Sometimes I'd go at 6 am, sometimes at 8 pm. I swam over lifting
with my friends because it was more time-flexible, and I always felt
amazing after a good swim, almost without exception.

**Ranting** to...anyone. Josiah over email or online Melee sessions, the
one or two friends who'd stop by my Twitch streams where I'd work on my
Bitswap experiments, or to Crystal during drives and dinners.

**Being productive at work**, during work hours. This allowed me to
focus on something else during the day and never (or, rarely) feel the
need to make up for a lack of productivity by working in the evenings.

**Regular calls with DJ**. This was useful for both accountability and
direction. DJ had a keen ability for taking in my scattered confusion
and asking just the right questions to guide me to the next step.

How do I put these blocks into place? I should swim every morning, but I
also find some of my most productive times late at night. I want to have
a consistent sleep schedule that lines up with my girlfriend's to some
degree, and my late night productivity can spiral into an unhealthy
habit of wasting time. (I ended up breaking my no-pornography streak for
the first time in a year, and almost broke my year long no-masturbation
record.)

*I haven't worked this hard for so long.*

*I used to be able to stay up so late, and really delve into complex
problems...*

*Logan and I had a great dynamic, we were literally just always
working.*

*But can I get into that flow again?*

*Am I too old for this?*

During the Twitch stream sessions, I'd work on my experiments or any
code-related problems. Normally, at least one of my friends would stop
by. That was immensely motivating, even if they didn't understand what I
was working on. As my work shifted primarily into writing the thesis
itself, Twitch streams made less sense.

I knew I'd have to make sacrifices in the time I put into Crystal and
my's relationship. But I also knew that I couldn't put it completely on
hold until I was done.

*What if I'm too distant during this, and our communication suffers?*

*I've been talking about finishing this thing for years. Do I trust
myself enough to actually do it this time? Is it worth the strain on my
relationship?*

*If I don't finish this, she'll lose trust in me.*

Predictably, the two week goal was overly-ambitious. I continued all of
this on into the summer semester. More time and flexibility, less
immediate pressure, more fear that I'd squander this whole thing.

**\*   \*   \***

*Ezer K'Negdo*

I found that, while I needed a lot of alone time to put as much focus
into the work as I could, it was revitalizing to spend time with
Crystal. So I needed the time with her, but exactly when I'd need her
was always up in the air. I'd decided on-the-fly what I needed in all
aspects of my life -- including time with her.

*Would tonight be a good night for Game of Thrones? Could I commit to
watching it the same night every week, or should I just feel it out?*

*Hm, if I do it on-the-fly, sometimes we indulge and watch too many
episodes.*

But on-the-fly was worth it.

When Crystal and I went to her parents' home for Thanksgiving last
November, we took her dog, Luna, back with us. Luna was 6 years old.
She'd never been crate trained, and ended up having severe anxiety when
left alone. So I'd been taking her to work with me so we could figure
out how to ease her into staying home alone.

Because of this, I'd see Crystal for the Luna exchange before and after
work. This was a nice excuse to have to see Crystal every day. At the
same time, our interactions were painfully short. I'd be tired,
stressed, while she had the stresses of life on her mind, and we had
very little time to really communicate in person. We'd text frequently,
which helped, but y'know.

Another, more constant, building block was **confronting life head-on**,
despite the thesis taking general priority. Crystal and I were
exceptionally good at bringing up relationship woes to one another even
during the worst weeks of the process. Not letting those things build up
made them so much easier to deal with, and I'm thankful that we'd
previously been so intentional on building this practice into our
relationship.

I couldn't be more grateful for Crystal during this time. I had to learn
how to communicate my own needs while simultaneously figuring out what
those needs were at a given time. It took me a few weeks to even
verbalize that I needed the flexibility to experiment with ever-shifting
routines. We were put through the fire, and we came out stronger. It was
chaotic, frustrating, challenging, and humbling. And every moment was
worth it.

**\*   \*   \***

Ultimately, what worked was segmenting my time and filling it as made
sense. The work day was for work. The morning was for swimming, or
eating breakfast. After work is either for swimming, making dinner with
Crystal, or going straight home to eat dinner and work. I'd try to make
dinner, but if that would take too long I'd just pick it up. In the
evening, I could see Crystal if I'd been productive early enough; but if
I had momentum, I'd keep working til late; or, if I just hadn't gotten
enough sleep but it was too late to go to Crystal's, I'd go to bed. As
an additional mental shift, I'd sometimes play Super Meat Boy during my
post-lunch lull, or to break up the job-work from thesis-work, or as a
reward for consistent thesis productivity.

***

*Salience*

***

**Talk about successes, not plans.**

"Yeah! I got accepted to a research internship in Portugal. I'll be
working on \[my elevator pitch].

"I should be leaving in about 3 months, I just have to \[take care of x,
y, and z]."

I'd repeat that conversation with the same people for over a year.
Eventually it became a meme.

What I took away from all of this was to share news about an
accomplishment *after* actually accomplishing the thing. Or, at least,
only when I'm in a place where all that could stop it from happening is
a catastrophe.

Really, though, it's more that I'd share news with increasingly
exclusive people in my life depending on its volatility.

**Affirmations**

If you've ever read A Dilbert Future, or you grew up with my mom, you've
heard of affirmations.

I got into the habit of repeating this affirmation to myself:

*I, David Grisham, will graduate with my master's thesis this semester.*

I started that in the spring semester. When I spilled over into summer,
it became:

*I, David Grisham, will graduate with my master's thesis this summer.*

I liked the idea of an affirmation without a time constraint. But school
is expensive.

I was very particular with that wording. I didn't want it to be
past-tense, i.e. *I, David Grisham, have finished my masters thesis.*,
because that makes me feel like I'm lying. I chose the word 'graduate'
because it includes not only finishing the thesis, but also fulfilling
all formalities required to graduate by their deadlines.

I'd repeat in my head while taking deep breaths before starting a swim.
Eventually I started varying which words I emphasized, changing my
inflection, etc.

*I, David Grisham, **will** graduate with my master's thesis this
summer*.

*I, David Grisham, **will** graduate with my master's thesis **this**
summer*.

*I, David Grisham, **will graduate**, with my master's thesis, **this**
summer*.

Those words help me cut through the rest of whatever thoughts would
otherwise flood my mind.

I didn't tell anyone about the affirmation at first. I had to at least
have solid momentum toward the degree, or be done.

**\*   \*   \***

*Maybe I'm just not cut out for research.*

*Maybe I'll be that guy who just never finished his degree.*

*But I'm so stubborn that I'll probably keep paying Mines semester after
semester until I finish it.*

*I'm a software engineer now, will I really benefit from this degree?*

***

*Shaddai*

***

**The humps don't get smaller, you just get better at surmounting
them.**

> *I ask not for a lighter burden, but for broader shoulders.*

At first, I tried to keep my code up to date with Protocol Labs's
changes. I figured they were fixing bugs all of the time, so whenever I
pulled in their updates I'd be improving the chance that my tests
wouldn't be interrupted by issues I didn't introduce.

Keeping all of this up to date became a giant pain in the ass, and was
mostly a waste of time. My implementation wasn't so complicated that I
wouldn't be able to implement it on top of a later `go-ipfs` version if
I really wanted to, and that part of the codebase was rarely changing
for most of my thesis.

The more important piece was the testbed Protocol Labs had been
developing. They deprecated the testing software I'd built my original
tests on in favor of a much more abstract but not-yet-feature-rich
testbed.

While figuring out how to write relatively basic tests under this new
framework, I also had to ensure that the tests I was building toward
were actually answering the relevant game theoretic questions.

I'd get stuck writing a test, do my best to get creative in fixing it,
find a way to at least somewhat verify that things were working as
expected, then try to wrap my head around the core research questions to
ensure the tests were answering them.

All of this was a massively overwhelming cycle between implementation
and theoretical modeling.

Only a few Protocol Labs devs understood the testbed itself, and their
time was limited. DJ only understood IPFS insofar as I had explained it
to him, but was great at highlighting the relevant game theory. It was
often that I'd have a problem to solve, spend hours trying to get
somewhere, and come out even more confused than when I went in. Problems
constantly felt insurmountable. And for many problems, surmounting them
left me wondering whether they'd really been worth solving in the first
place. It wasn't until the last month or so that a few of the problems
started to feel *achievable*.

I learned to set goals of a reasonable size, not paint myself into a
corner by trying to generalize and over-engineer solutions, and accept
that it would never be perfect.

I recently started working on writing a Battlesnake in Jai. Jai is a
programming language that's in beta, so a lot of common libraries aren't
available in it yet. I decided early on to build as much of the codebase
as I could 'from scratch'.

First, I used Beej's Guide to Network Programming to establish a basic
TCP server. The guide is written in C, which wasn't too difficult to
port to Jai.

Then I had to parse the HTTP requests I was getting. I'd never done this
before, and it sounded annoying. But after a bit of investigation I
realized it might not be so bad. I did a simple,
poorly-written-but-working implementation, then rode off of that
momentum to write a substantially cleaner and more resilient version. I
didn't have to write a fully-fledged HTTP server; I just had to handle
Battlesnake requests.

All of these problems, while feeling substantial in their own way, felt
*very* achievable when put into context with the overcome thesis
problems. Hills next to mountains.

***

> *I am El Shaddai. I am the One who told the heavens and earth,
> "Enough!" Because if not, they would have continued growing until
> now.*

***

***

*Moad*

***

**No one else is going to do it.**

28 May 2021: My 28th birthday.

*Why didn't my dad impart on me the importance of building and
maintaining things?*

*He'd worked so hard, learned so much. I would just play Pokemon over
helping him work on the car.*

*I guess he did impart an appreciation for the aesthetic of taking
things apart and DIY on me.*

*It just took a long time for that to blossom in a meaningful way for
me.*

***

Working on IPFS has been interesting, because it's very cutting-edge
technology.

But I had at least *some* ability to add to it, experiment with it....to
possibly contribute to it. Most of the PL devs were busy with other
work. The parts of Bitswap I worked on were rarely updated for the
entirety of my thesis. I always thought that someone would implement
what I was working on before me, and do it much better. To be clear,
that probably would've been the case if someone had been around to do
it. But by the end of the process, I at least understood the relevant
problems and could reasonably contribute to a discussion about
alternative implementations.

By the time of my defense, I'd probably practiced the presentation 3 or
4 times. During the masters proces I was rarely confident that I'd done
*any* real work, but was finally starting to feel like I had.

Then I gave the presentation.

*Oh no.*

*I haven't done anything useful.*

*They're going to see right through this.*

*They'll tear me apart with questions.*

I'd taken an undergraduate class with one of my committee members, and
had been a terrible student. I often wouldn't show up to class in those
days, and his wasn't one I could simply not attend and still do well in.

A few semesters later, I brought him a slip to sign to let me into a
graduate level class. He told me he'd sign it, but I'd have to be a much
better student than I had been. I was a significantly better student in
my CS graduate classes. Unfortunately, he didn't actually teach the
class -- a graduate student did.

*Dinesh knows I'm full of shit.*

*He didn't get to see me improve as a student, and this research isn't
good.*

*When you really talk through it, I did so little...*

My committee had very few questions for me. They congregated without me,
then brought me back into the call to congratulate me. Dinesh stayed on
after with a few more questions, and told me I'd done a good job.

***

I thought I would want a bit of a break from intense work upon finishing
the thesis. I was wrong. It was much more fun and rewarding to keep
building my skills, but without the crazy pressure. Crystal and I are
continuing to build our relationship, which always has new challenges.
But we made it through a very intense few months, and kept solid
relationship habits throughout. I go to lifts again, because I want to
contribute to that social group + environment. And I already mentioned
the Jai Battlesnake Twitch streams.

Toward the end of the thesis, a company I'd been following since they
were founded 6 months ago, Capsule Social, posted a job for a backend
Node JS IPFS engineer. The description seemed perfect for me. I kept
delaying my application because I was working on the thesis. I finally
got it in, and a day later the job posting was taken down.

They put up another position, for a 'Token Specialist'. Basically,
someone who would design and implement a platform-specific
cryptocurrency. The skillset would require a crossover between game
theory, distributed systems, and software engineering.

*I'm glad I got my application in for the backend engineer position.*

*I'm not cut out to be a token specialist, there's someone more
experienced out there for that.*

*The game theory I used for my thesis was incredibly simple, and
wouldn't be helpful here.*

> Your application to Capsule SocialMon, 26 July 2021, 1:14 AM to meDear David,Thank you for your interest in Capsule Social, Inc. and the NodeJS
> Backend Engineer role we published.\[...]Many thanks,Marco Barulli

The interview went well. They sent a follow up email asking if I'd be
interested in taking on some of the responsibility for the Token
Specialist position.

*They don't understand, I'm not ready for this sort of thing.*

*Though I suppose cryptocurrencies have only been a thing for 13 years,
it's not like there are a ton of experts in this field...*

*Hell, I don't even trust 'experts' in general.*

*They wouldn't have offered me this if they didn't see something in me.*

*It would be fun to do...*

*I'll be honest with them, make sure we're on the same page. If they'll
pay me to try, I'll do it.*

I made it clear that I wasn't experienced in the area, but I could do my
best to learn.

On 13 August 2021, I accepted a position as Software Engineer and Token
Specialist at Capsule Social.
