---
author: Crystal Piedy
title: Broken Bones, Broken Heart
date: 29 January 2022
img: /uploads/Crystal_Piedy_2022-01-29.jpg
---

Have you ever had a moment so burned into your memory that when you
close your eyes it feels like you are standing right there again,
reliving the same moment?

For me, this moment is the day my parents told me that the illness that
my sister had been fighting her whole life had finally taken her over.

I was six years old, and although I was young I understood most of what
was going on. I knew that my sister was sick and so we had to spend a
lot of time in the hospital. I knew that she couldn't really walk on her
own, so she was in a wheelchair and my parents had to do things like
help her shower.

My parents were sitting on their bed, holding hands. They called me into
their room. I could tell they had both been crying. They told me
together that my sister was not coming home. I didn't need any more
information, I knew exactly what they meant. I felt this overwhelming
dark feeling take over me. Now I understand that darkness was grief. I
ran into the living room and hid under a blanket and just cried. My
parents came to find me. They held me for the rest of the day.

And on that day in 2002 I knew she was gone.

*\"Grief is kind of one of those things like falling in love or having a
baby or watching \"The Wire\" on HBO where you don\'t get it until you
get it, until you do it. And once you do it, once it\'s your love or
your baby, once it\'s your grief and your front row at the funeral, you
get it. You understand what you\'re experiencing is not a moment in
time. It\'s not a bone that will reset. But you\'ve been touched by
something chronic, something incurable. It\'s not fatal, but sometimes
grief feels like it could be.\"*

*Nora Mcinerny*

On the day of our front row at the funeral, I got it.

As I continue to move through this world without her in it, I always
wonder what she would've been like at this age. Would she be quiet +
thoughtful, like our dad? Maybe, she always seemed to veer towards his
personality type. Would she have been loud + outspoken, like our
mother + I? Maybe, but we also drove her crazy too. She did have lots of
friends though, so she probably would've been the most beautiful
combination of all those personality types. She was the glue that kept
our family together. Maybe she would've started her own family, what
kind of guys would she be into? I'll have to ask my mom about that one.

I will never have the answers to these questions. She left this world a
very long time ago, I like to think that wherever she is, she's dancing
and walking and singing. This disease may have taken her away from us
physically. But her memory will live on in our family forever. Her
presence lives on forever. My mother taught me to be grateful for my
health. I wake up everyday and am eternally grateful for my heart that
keeps beating and my legs that allowed me to explore my dance passions.

The memories of practically living in hospitals at a very young age live
on in me. When I get really sick and need to go to the hospital. I get
scared. Like really fucking scared. I can't be alone or I'll freak out.
The intense fear of hospitals that arose after watching my sister\'s
illness take over her body hasn't gone away. When I was 15 I did an
internship at a hospital with my school. We rotated through different
parts of the hospital and I was totally fine until we hit the ICU. I
felt the fear take over my body. It was like I was transported back to
that time. I was a young girl watching my sister get poked and prodded
while my mom cried, begging for her to get better.

*I can still smell the sterile environment.*

*I can feel the cold overly air conditioned air.*

*I can see the white plain walls that are dressed up with children's
paintings and photos of children whose spirits still exist in these
walls.*

*I can hear the constant buzzing, ringing of bells, beeping of machines
that are breathing for those who can't anymore.*

It all feels so familiar.

Like a home I never wanted to know, and couldn't help but remember.

I knew stepping into that ICU that I could never pursue a career in this
field. I instantly felt like I was going to faint. I felt sick to my
stomach, but I choked the feeling down for the sake of just making it
through the day.

Fast forward to a few years later. I had moved to Colorado already. I
was dating around. Nothing super promising happened in the relationship
world. But I happened to be out on a second date with a guy whose
company I enjoyed.

While I was on this date, my phone started to ring. Now normally, I
would NEVER answer a phone call on a date. I think that's incredibly
rude. But something in my gut told me I needed to answer the phone.

When your gut tells you something, you listen.

So I excused myself and answered the phone. It was my mom and she
sounded... upset, weak even, like she had barely mustered up the
strength to call me. Before she even spoke my stomach sank, I knew that
whatever she was about to say was going to be unpleasant.

She was in the ICU. She had been there for two days because she had
contracted pneumonia. Her blood pressure plummeted and by the time she
got to the hospital it was dangerously low. The doctors had said that if
they had waited any longer it might\'ve been too late to help her. I was
instantly in a panic, I knew I needed to get home as quickly as
possible. I told her I'd be on the next flight home and that I would
even drive 11 hours all night if I needed to.

I was so scared but I was also incredibly angry. Why had they waited two
days to tell me?

I could've been there had they told me earlier.

I could've helped.

What if she died in those two days and I found out after the fact?

After I got off the phone with my mom. I called my dad and instantly was
crying and screaming at him for not telling me sooner.

How could he not let me know that my mom was suffering?

Now that is not my shining moment and I'm not proud of that moment. But
it's worth sharing because it demonstrates what my parents already knew
about me that I was still learning.

I was (and still am) afraid of hospitals, ICUs, and illnesses.

So they collectively decided not to tell me. They didn't want me to
worry and so they did what they thought would be best to try to protect
me. Even if that meant hurting me in different ways.

Which ultimately ended up making it worse. Because by the time I found
out it was almost lethal for my mother, and I knew I had to act fast.

I went back inside. I told my date what was going on, he helped me to
calm down long enough to buy a plane ticket home and, while things
didn't work out for this particular person and I, I am incredibly
grateful for his kindness and understanding that night.

I was on a plane the next morning.

By the time I got to the hospital my mom was not doing well. She wasn't
allowed to get out of bed on her own. She was extremely pale and her
hair was matted. I held her hand and cried, I climbed into bed next to
her and started to brush the mats out of her hair. She would yell at me
that I was hurting her. I can always count on my mom to criticize me
even while she\'s in a hospital bed.

At least that woman's consistent.

She was happy to see me but upset at her situation.

She was angry with me, with the nurses, and with God.

At her worst she told me that she wanted to die.

At her best, she looked me in my eyes, smiled and would caress my hair
and tell me that she loved me.

I stayed with her for the next few days.

It was day 5 of her being there and while she was on the upward swing it
was still touch-and-go. And still incredibly scary for all of us. We
went through ups and downs as a family. I sobbed hysterically on
multiple occasions because I wasn't ready for my mother to leave this
earth and there were plenty of times it felt like that would be the
outcome. I had mixed feelings of anxiety, stress, worry, and anger.

Her doctor saw me sobbing and at one point said to me, "She's getting
better. She's going to be fine."

Without an ounce of compassion in his voice. He didn't even look up from
the computer.

I understand, that's his job. Don't get attached. Deliver the facts to
the family. Move on to the next patient.

But what he didn't see was the battle we had already fought for my
sister\'s life.

He didn't hear my mother just tell me that she wished she was dead.

He didn't understand my family.

At one point I walked down to the cafeteria by myself to get chicken
fingers because I hadn't eaten. I felt eerily similar to that little
girl stuck in the kids room of the hospital eating alone and not being
able to see her sister.

It felt like I was stuck in the worst scene of a movie, wondering when
it would end.

Could this really be happening?

I already lost one person.

Am I going to lose another?

Is life really this unfair?

I could barely stomach the food. I was afraid to be away from my mother
for even a second. Even if she berated me while I was in the room.

And by the grace of God\...

My mom got better.

She was released from the hospital a week later and I am so grateful to
my father who took her to the hospital, the doctors who made sure she
got better, and the nurses who dealt with her mood swings. She gets to
be here today because of all of them.

I am still afraid of hospitals. I'm a hypochondriac because every time I
get sick I freak the fuck out. It feels like the end of the world.
Everytime my mom or father\'s tone is slightly off I think someone's
dying.

I worry that the disease that took my sister\'s life is in my genes.

I worry that my body will fail me one day and condemn my future child to
the same fate.

I'm still working through a lot of these fears. The pandemic has not
made those fears any easier.

My sister was sick. That fact is true. But she is also incredibly smart,
she is persistent in whatever she wants. She loves Pokemon and video
games and the color pink. She HATES losing, one time she locked me in my
room for three hours because of it. She has a smile that lights up a
room. She is so good at making friends. She worked so hard every minute
of her life to be here.

I speak in present tense because she is still here with me every day.
She guides how I walk through this life. She pushes me to be better. She
is not here physically but her memory will live with me forever.

Now why am I telling a bunch of strangers on the internet this story?

I think stories deserve to be told. Even if they are hard and scary. I
felt compelled to share my family\'s story and I just wanted you all to
know.

That you are so much more than the worst thing that has ever happened to
you.

And those you love are so much more than the way they left this Earth.

But you also deserve to tell those stories, and if you feel like no one
wants to hear them\...

Know that I do.

Everyone is struggling with something and some people are just aching to
share their stories, so share yours, and treat others with compassion.

I am grateful for this life I get to live.

I am grateful for my health.

I live this life for you.

Wherever you are.

**\*   \*   \***

*In honor of Cindy Waleska Piedy*

*November 20th, 1985 - June 15th, 2002*
