---
author: Joe Hunt
title: Arcadia
subtitle: The Importance of Place and History on Narrative
date: 29 March 2020
img: ./uploads/Joe_Hunt_2020-03-29.jpg
---

Thirty-five miles east of Colorado Springs lies the town of Calhan,
proud home of its own school district, two gas stations, and Norman's
Video Store, which rented VHS tapes up until 2010. Piecemeal cars
sputter exhaust from corroded mufflers, rolling down dust-laden roads.
Atop the highest elevation on Boulder Street is my home, shaped and
reshaped over nearly one hundred years. The front lawn is neatly mown,
well over a dozen species of flowers in bloom patrol the edges of the
porch like loyal sentries, and a cherry tree, truncated halfway up its
length, competes with the twenty-five foot spruce for sunlight.

There, on the porch, my Dad drinks powdered iced tea by the pint from a
plastic pitcher older than I am. I greet him, am crushed between huge
arms mottled brown-red with countless hours under the sun, and am
pricked by the grey stubble that forever accompanies his protruding
chin.

There, on the kitchen wall corner, my fingers trace over annotated
notches, cut over sixteen years. The hallway seemed so much larger when
I viewed the world at five.

On the twenty-second night of the first month of 2016, the Calhan Fire
Department found him. Acute bronchopneumonia in the setting of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. James Robert Hunt was 57. He died
sometime in the night on the twenty-first, one day before my twentieth
birthday.

I became the sole denizen of that house, whose floor creaks before the
two-stair incline between the living room and my bedroom; it was all
that I had left of him.

Tayeb Salih, the London-educated Sudanese author of *Season of Migration
to the North*, tells the story of an unnamed narrator who returns to his
mother country, serving as a civil servant in Khartoum. In his novel,
Salih endows the stark locales of Sudan with emotive power and purpose
in guiding his narrator through processing the enigmatic history of
Mustafa Sa'eed, who brings home his own demons that cause anguish for
nearly everyone in the narrator's home village of Wad Hamid.

Likewise, Argentine author Jorge Luis Borges' short story "The Library
of Babel" expounds the baffling effect of an infinite repository;
enshrined within, all past and future knowledge -- alongside their
proofs and, most troubling, counter-proofs of various validity. Borges'
library accommodates a multitude of individuals trying to discern some
greater meaning, purpose, or comfort among its endless landings.

Through both of works, readers witness just how strongly location
influences narrative by experiencing, in some small way, the impressive
ability for a place to influence how we perceive and process reality.

Borges explores the metaphysical exertions on the mind by one's
environment in "The Library of Babel". Published in 1941, Borges' story
transports the reader to the ordinal, alien world populated with all
manner of books, each comprising exactly 410 pages of twenty-two symbols
and three punctuation marks. The orthography of the perceived universe,
as it were. One may discover a book which repeats the symbols M C V, or
exhibits total nonsense. Building further upon this basis, the narrator
describes the discovery that no two books in the library are identical,
that every possible combination of written word is contained within the
library:

"... *that is, all that is able to be expressed, in every language.* All
-- *the detailed history of the future, the autobiographies of the
archangels, the faithful catalog of the Library, thousands and thousands
of false catalogues, the proof of the falsity of those false catalogues,
a proof of the falsity of the* true *catalog, ...".*

At first, an attentive reader might realize that, even with a large
catalogue of twenty-five characters arrayed in eighty lines across 410
pages, the possible number of works is definitively finite. The library
itself is knowably large -- it follows then that the extent of the
library is within human understanding - the scholars have accepted as
fact that it has always existed, and shall always continue to exist. Yet
Borges describes something akin to an uncountably infinite collection of
tomes, which encompass all of human thought, emotion, and experience;
nuanced variations of true or false events, with no effective means, no
Rosetta Stone, with which to judge the veracity of accounts.

Borges describes the effect upon the librarians: the proud or greedy
realization that, somewhere, in some book, there must exist a
"Vindication", some sublime discourse on one's past and future; the
hopeful hypothesis that a total, comprehensive description of the
Library rests, undisturbed, in some unknown landing, in some
unprecedented language; despair, as a man realizes no traversal, no
matter through how many galleries, would carry them towards a probable
chance discovery of some canonical tome. Neither would wanton
inquisition and destruction of unworthy catalogues affect change:

"*\...One: the Library is so enormous that any reduction of human origin
is infinitesimal. The other: every copy is unique, irreplaceable, but
(since the Library is total) there are always several hundred thousand
imperfect facsimiles*".

This place encapsulates the totality of experience -- devilishly ordinal
in its inscrutability.

Similar emotions are evoked in *Season of Migration to the North*, Tayeb
Salih's second novel. Here, in the heart of post-British colonial Sudan,
Salih's narrator has returned to his village, Wad Hamid, outside
Khartoum along the Blue Nile. Salih writes of the metamorphosis caused
by British colonial rule: the place that he calls home, rooted though it
is in tradition and religion, has come to be neatly divided into
beareaus of land management, agriculture, and civil politics. Along the
Blue Nile, irrigation by mechanical innovation form the vanguard of what
is, ultimately, the fate of traditional ways of life.

Salih then introduces Mustafa Sa'eed, Sudanese pariah and the fulcrum of
his novel. Sa'eed, born in Sudan, showed an early gift for academics,
which he attempted to satiate by attending secondary school in Cairo,
finally ending at the London University where he becomes a lecturer.
Here, Sa'eed masters his studies and publishes work in economics and
social studies, enjoying the comfort that academic prestige draws in
western circles. Nonetheless, he suffers from terrific ennui. His
affliction: an inhuman, dispassionate use of individuals as means to an
end. He acknowledges the help he has received in his studies, but feels
no warmth or gratitude; he is responsible for the death of his wife, and
partially responsible for the suicides of former, discarded lovers
Isabelle Seymour, Anne Hammond, and Sheila Greenwood. Further, Sa'eed's
inability to moderate himself come to affect everyone in the village,
further perpetuating the influence of British dominion in the lives of
Salih's characters, geographic or otherwise. Mustafa acknowledges all of
this while he recounts his history to our narrator, who listens intently
and whose personal struggle to cope with these revelations form the
basis for the main conflict of the novel.

It is important to notice that Sa'eed actively decided to return to Wad
Hamid, rather than Cairo or Khartoum, in order to exorcise the
influences of his London education. Mustafa's western-abetted
intellectualism impairs, rather than enhances, his ability to connect
with others, and he yearns to live a simple life. He states

*"Yes, I now know that in the rough wisdom that issues from the mouths
of simple people lies our whole hope of salvation. A tree grows simply
and your grandfather has lived and will die simply. That is the
secret".*

Our narrator, like Sa'eed, returns to Wad Hamid so he can enjoy the
respite of having a strong sense of belonging. Of being home.

Mustafa's revelation of his past - and later, subsequent death - leads
the narrator to doubt his perception of his home and of Sa'eed. In later
chapters, our narrator meets a retired civil servant who attended school
with Mustafa, who confirms that our antagonist was indeed a noted
academic, but the information of Mustafa's humble retirement is
questioned by a man who worked in the Ministry of Finance. An alternate
story that Sa'eed is still in London emerges. The discordant nature of
information surrounding Mustafa obfuscates the attempts of the narrator
to understand him, fueling greater paranoia and obsession. We
additionally observe the inverse influence of *man* on *place* -subtle
or otherwise - Mustafa has over the village through following chapters,
witnessing the destabilization or destruction of the village's values
and social order.

It is here that parallels between Borges' and Salih's narrators
coincide: both struggle to grasp the *what* and the *why* of their
circumstances. Certainly, both narratives offer deliberately baffling
and contradictory environments to the reader, which encourage one to
doubt the validity of a given account. Salih weaves a convoluted
narrative populated with various accounts of Mustafa Sa'eed, which the
narrator must process in his obsession with understanding a man he
shares a great commonality with; Borges entrenches his reader in a world
described by definite rules, lacking incontrovertible means of grasping
it.

The invalidity of attempting to interpret the world as a rational space
is suggested in both works. Borges' narrator recollects that a sect of
librarians hold that all books are ruled more by random than
deterministic processes -- that, "the rule of the library is not
'sense', but 'non-sense'". He acknowledges their existence in a
disapproving tone, but their inclusion as a factual observation is not
refuted, as, in the penultimate paragraph, he acknowledges increasing
suicides or degenerate pilgrimages as evidence of the eventual downfall
of the human species. The library, in its infinite existence, will
outlast us - the immutability of place is, perhaps, the only solace to
mutable inhabitants.

Salih, likewise, allows his narrator a moment of respite partway through
his journey back to Khartoum in the seventh chapter. There, in the
desert, he rides in a lorry, accompanied by the driver and a handful of
travelers along the most direct route through Sudan. Here, under
unyielding sun, he borders on incoherence. He begins to question the
validity of Mustafa's involvement in the deaths of his mistresses:

*"\...an idea occurred to me; turning it over in my mind, I decided to
express it and see what happened. I said to them that she had not killed
him but that he had died from sunstroke -- just as Isabella Seymour had
died, and Sheila Greenwood, Ann Hammond and Jean Morris. Nothing
happened."*

Salih's desert obliterates memory; insomnia, imposed by a relentless
sun.

The driver finally parks the vehicle at sundown. The lorry is fueled
with water and oil, men with alcohol, and our narrator with a cigarette,
beneath a cool, compassionate night sky. Here the narrator states in the
cool of evening after much work, the driver sings -- then one, two, a
multitude of voices join in. Soon a clamour, as travelers along the road
converge and everyone celebrates, but for what? To whom?

To nothing.

*"A feast without meaning, a mere desperate act that had sprung up
impromptu like the small whirlwinds that rise up in the desert and then
die. At dawn we parted."*

While the library indirectly antagonizes Borges' narrator, the parallel
between how the *place* of each writers' narrative affects
interpretation and processing of events is apparent. Just as Salih's
narrator undergoes a profound metamorphosis first to understand, then to
separate himself from, the mystery of Mustafa Sa'eed by relenting to the
desert, Borges' attempts to explain the impermanence of *our* world
through the immense structure he inhabits -- *the* world. In both works,
the man is inseparable from the place, the course of his actions
determined in minute ways by their surroundings.

**Citations**

Borges, J. L., & Hurley, A. (1998). Jorge Luis Borges: collected
fictions. New York: Penguin Books.

Ṣāliḥ al-Ṭayyib, & Johnson-Davies, D. (2009). Season of migration to the
north. New York: Review Books.
