---
author: Joe Hunt
title: ...and an Engine on Fire
subtitle: On Liminality
date: 2021-09-10
img: /uploads/Joe_Hunt_2021-09-10.jpg
---

"... *The voice was speaking Latin... reciting a speech or a prayer or
an incantation... my trepidation made me think them incomprehensible,
and endless; later, during the enormous conversation of that night, I
learned they were the first paragraph of the twenty-fourth chapter of
the seventh book of Pliny's* Naturalis Historia*. The subject of that
chapter is memory; the last words were* ut nihil non iisdem verbis
redderetur auditum....

*I come now to the most difficult point in my story, a story whose only*
raison d'être *(as my readers should be told from the outset) is that
dialogue half a century ago. I will not attempt to reproduce the words
of it, which are now forever irrecoverable. Instead, I will summarize,
faithfully, the many things Ireneo told me...*

*With one quick look, you and I perceive three wineglasses on a table;
Funes perceived every grape that had been pressed into the wine and all
the stalks and tendrils of its vineyard. He knew the forms of the clouds
in the southern sky on the morning of April 30, 1882, and he could
compare them in his memory with the veins in the marbled binding of a
book he had seen only once, or with the feathers of spray lifted by an
oar in the Río Negro on the eve of the Battle of Quebracho. Nor were
these memories simple -- every visual image was linked to muscular
sensations, thermal sensations, and so on. He was able to reconstruct
every dream, every daydream he had ever had\...each reconstruction had
itself taken an entire day. 'I, myself, alone, have more memories than
all mankind since the world began,'  he said to me... Ireneo could do
the same with the stormy mane of a young colt, a small herd of cattle on
a mountainside, a flickering fire and its uncountable ashes, and the
many faces of a dead man at a wake. I have no idea how many stars he saw
in the sky.*

*In the seventeenth century, Locke postulated (and condemned) an
impossible language in which each individual thing -- every stone, every
bird, every branch -- would have its own name; Funes once contemplated a
similar language, but discarded the idea as too general, too ambiguous.
The truth was, Funes remembered not only every leaf of every tree in
every patch of forest, but every time he had perceived or imagined that
leaf. *

*Funes could continually perceive the quiet advances of corruption, of
tooth decay, of weariness. He saw -- he* noticed -- *the progress of
death, of humidity."*

*Jorge Luis Borges, "Funes and his Memory"*

**Caveat Emptor**

I once received praise from an adjunct professor at Mines my freshman
year that always stuck with me. His name was Robert Snyderman -- a
lanky, twenty-something poet from Boulder who came down from the
mountains in flannel shirts, suspenders, and Chippewa boots to teach a
bunch of engineering students about poetry, literature, writing, and
Borges. I remember well his wild, curly hair, his round tortoise-shell
glasses, the odd way he sat in his seat, and how he eviscerated the
syallabus of our Nature and Human Values class. Most memorable, though,
was feedback he gave me on a poem I wrote a long time ago:

"***for the love of God, don't stop writing."***

Had I had my way, I would have been either a philosophy or a literature
major in college; given that my Dad saw no prospects there, he heavily
leaned on me to go to Mines and become an engineer to make "bookoo
bucks". I can only imagine his chagrin, teaching high school mathematics
now.

Point being: this piece is unlike anything I've ever written. Most all
of my articles are analyses of literary themes, ideas, places, or
characters; vivisections of the literary works that most impact me at a
given time or place. I haven't written a poem in seven years, and I
certainly haven't written something like a stream of consciousness piece
before. Like all forays into memory, this one's littered with errors:
grammatical, thematic, temporal, and contextual. I make no claim to
veracity: what follows is not how things *are*, or necessarily how *I
think things ought to be*; quite simply, what follows is an exercise in
*feeling*. I am neither a faithful nor comprehensive observer of the
events that follow: full accounts, in greater detail and with greater
truth, can likely be gleaned from the many people around me who've seen
the result of the thoughts and feelings I've allowed to play out below.

Nabokov has Charles Kinbote, John Shade's insidious narrator in *Pale
Fire*. I am certainly not Nabokov, and I harbour no malignant intentions
like Kinbote to befuddle or make you question this piece. Read this with
a grain of salt, take from this what you will. I am not Funes.

"**I'm Loving This Chaotic Energy You've Got Going On"**

It's summer, and I'm sitting in my living room trying to play the past
year back in my head. I recognize *that* twelve months have past, I've
completed another academic year at my job, I've been active and involved
in the lives of many of my friends and family: I can look at the thank
you cards and invites on my fridge, count the parking stubs, touch the
hospital bracelets, and browse the photos dwelling in the corners of a
hard drive. What I can't, with great accuracy or confidence: recollect
conversations with my Uncle at our dive bar; recount the great joke I
heard from, or told to, to a student; remember what street I'm on, how I
ended up in the turning lane, or how I'm already halfway home from the
gym; feel the cold in my toes submerged in the creek, put my thumb on
the name of the person I *literally* just shook hands with, or rattle
off what the hell it was I did that day. Why the fuck can't I remember
the date of our anniversary some days?

I can't always bear the silence, eating at the dining room table, while
the black dog comes stealing up from the corner of the room. Something
in me starts panicking, the pacing starts, and the next thing I know I'm
stifling a sob I didn't know needed to come up back down my throat.
Somewhere, someplace, sometime else: I'm peeling myself off my spinning
bathroom floor, taking inventory of just how loudly my head is
screaming, checking the kitchen's not a wreck, and wondering when
someone's going to tell me things are going to be alright. Some nights I
crave the warmth of her in my bed and the comfort of being wrapped in a
bundle of arms and a tangle of blankets; others, I can't stand the
company of a living soul. I crave someone to hold and comfort me,
simultaneously fighting the sensation of my skin crawling being around
others. At times, I'm taking my bearing between waking in the dark at
night, failing to navigate liminal space between fitful wakings and
awful dreams. It's usually a race to see who's going to beat the other
to the punch -- me, on two, three, four hours of sleep; or that
dizzyingly quick sensation of having fucked up something good I once had
irrecoverably. That fleet bastard's done it again, and the litany
against myself starts in earnest before I've even rolled over on my
other side to relieve the arm that's painfully asleep. Some mornings it
takes an hour, sometimes two, to put my feet on the carpet and get a
shower in. I start a journal and dump my mind into it. Fits and starts,
high and low, long diatribes, forays into a younger version of me, and
more questions than answers. Six, seven, eight months bled together, and
try as I might, I can't find the seam with my finger or spot the
transition.

My old hobbies fail to lift my mood. The PC I built last spring looks
more like a trap, my living room an invitation to ignore things I've not
allowed myself to process or recognize. I have a harder time eating. I
spend time with my friends and family and feel *more anxious*, not less,
at times; that novel I've been working through is suddenly too goddamn
hard, the drawing I've had half finished for years too challenging, and
the barbell so outlandishly heavy. I get outside, and immediately want
to go in; I sit inside, and something howls from the corner of the room
or under the bed for me to get out.

Is this then? Is now yet to come?

**If I Hear the Words "Pivot", "Grace", and "New Normal" *One More
Fucking Time*\...**

I realized I wanted to teach in the same room I learned Calculus II.
Brown Hall at Mines. I had sat down to work on some homework and study,
a quarter of the way through my senior year, and the thought struck me
that *fuck, I'm going to graduate in less than twelve months. What the*
hell *am I going to do?* I had attended the fall career fair in
September of 2017, spoken with a member of the Boettcher Teacher
Residency based in Denver, and made it through their telephone and in
person interviews. I was writing two or three essays describing my
mission and vision for my classroom and why I wanted to teach. Being
forced to sit down and organize a previously nebulous curiosity for
mathematics and an only nascent appreciation for all the truly amazing
people who guided me in life to where I am now was an enlightening
experience in humility and gratitude. When I got the call from that same
gentleman in October or November, I couldn't hold back tears of joy
knowing that I was doing something with myself to add to the world
around me. It had been a rare moment of happiness in an otherwise bleak
and turbulent couple of years.

Within a few months, I was attending meetings at Mines for the TEAM-UP
program, a campus organization run by professors from the University of
Northern Colorado who worked with Mines students to find placements and
start careers in education. I was interested in learning more about the
job before I was thrown headlong into it by the Boettcher program, which
was going to place me directly into a classroom for a year - with no
funding - and only the most rudimentary crash course in *how* to, you
know, actually fucking teach. In the course of tagging along to
meetings, I recognized my old Physics 1 professor, Dr. Callan, was a
major part of the organization; through her, and through Professor
Fanselow at UNC, I deepened my involvement in the organization, quickly
saw how untenable my position with Boettcher would have been, and was
*very strongly encouraged* to jump ship in lieu of the Noyce Scholars
Fellowship.

Right place, right time. By February 2018, I was signed on to receive
\$10,000 per semester through the Noyce Foundation, enrolled in a year
and a half of classes through UNC's online graduate program, and in line
for field experiences after I graduated with my B.S. in Computational
and Applied Mathematics. I still haven't the foggiest how I came to be
so fortunate, and the gratitude I have for my instructors, the
TEAM-UP/Noyce programs, and my managing instructors at Golden High
School and Alameda International Jr/Sr. High School is immense. Even if,
during student teaching, I wanted to pluck my eyebrows out at three in
the morning from stress, and came close on more than one occasion to a
complete emotional breakdown.

By May of 2019, I had two job offers from two high schools in the
northern part of Denver and in Parker, respectively; I finished my
student teaching with a real, honest-to-god job lined up in August and
couldn't have been happier and more proud of how far I had come. I spent
the summer anxiously anticipating what it would be like, leading my own
room, my own way. The autonomy and creative freedom to lead my students
both excited and terrified me: no one had ever placed me in a position
of responsibility for others before, and here I was, staring down the
barrel of a roster 150-something students deep. I was giddy, naive, and
full of excitement. And, perhaps most of all, I felt like I was growing
into the man I wanted to be, after an incredibly dark season after my
Dad's death.

That was a good summer.

The year that followed was both incredibly challenging, impatiently
demanding, increasingly rewarding, and a whole hell of a lot of fun. I
regularly spent ten or twelve hours writing lesson plans, organizing
class materials, grading, and anticipating my students abilities and
skills; I laughed more in my classroom than I had in a long time; I
watched my students grow, as people and as learners. I came home every
week with a funny anecdote, a frustrating story; oftentimes dog tired,
and ready only to collapse on the living room sofa and sleep. It was an
incredibly creative and productive period, and I heard from many
students that, despite my inexperience and lack of resources, I was
their favourite teacher.

Nothing quite describes the feeling you get when someone you know tells
you you've made a difference.

The second semester of that year proved colourful. I had been following
on AP News an odd, tangential story evolving in Wuhan, China about an
emerging, flu-like illness that was beginning to rapidly spread within
the country. Lockdowns were triggering, and the international media
watched on with an equal interest (which is to say, not much at all) as
that of Ebola in 2014. From my own forays into epidemiological modeling
in a mathematical biology course, I understood much of the basic
terminology used to describe the outbreak and its dynamics. I read about
it every day. It was certainly fascinating seeing something like this in
real life, versus an academic setting -- at one point, I even wrote a
rudimentary Excel spreadsheet using forward Euler's method to run a very
simple SIR model. Within a couple more months, these concerns seemed
trite and even in bad taste, as cases began popping up in the United
States. Teachers began discussing the possibility of a truncated school
year. Staff meetings surrounded the possible necessity of preparing to
teach online and equipment was distributed as a contingency. In March,
we broke for spring break; halfway through, our school informed us we
would not be returning, and the last time I saw most of my first class
was the final day before then. The rest of March, April, and May were
confusing, disembodied attempts at providing students with learning
materials and "opportunities", poor attempts to engage our kids, and the
ultimate failure to keep over 70% of our students' attention as they
enjoyed a four-month summer break.

That summer, the whole fucking world *lost it's marbles.* Case counts
exploded internationally, and US infections and deaths climbed to
dizzingly high peaks in truly frightening fashion. My now ex, my
roommate, and I organized grocery store runs in the event that suburban
Denver took a route similar to Wuhan (complete, mandatory isolation),
dividing to conquer the grocery aisles among similarly worried faces.
Toilet paper became a luxury, canned and frozen food flew off shelves,
hand sanitizer suddenly stopped existing, and everyone battened down the
hatches for something that hasn't been seen in a hundred years. No
federal, state, or local governing body had *even a remote grasp* on
what to do, who to refer questions to, or what to base guidance on. Your
local pastor at some bible-thumping Baptist congregation had about as
much clout as Anthony Fauci, Andrew Cuomo, or *the fucking president.*
The wearing of masks, social distancing, and basic etiquette became a
political problem; someone's basic right to their health a platform and
billboard for signifying allegiance to ideology, rather than to common
sense or concern for one another. Conversations broke down, arguments
abounded, and friends subdivided themselves into "bubbles" into or out
of which no man or woman could roam. Our immediate workout group set
groundrules, organized movie nights, and our limited weekend plans were
set. Griffin and I often wondered how many times we could drive down
Santa Fe at 5:00 in the afternoon with *absolutely no traffic* on the
way to non-essential workouts, without getting stopped by police. Gas
prices plummeted to something just shy of \$2.00/gallon. It was, and
please pardon the pun, something not unlike a fever dream.

Introverts, like myself, relished the opportunity to crash in the living
room with a pile of books as tall as they were, with no excuses to make
or questions to dodge about weekend plans. I fulfilled a longtime dream
and assembled my first desktop computer on my first try, hooked it up to
the stereo and TV in the living room, and enjoyed the newfound freedom
of summer uninterrupted to play videogames with my friends, watch
movies, read two or three novels I'd been putting off, and enjoy a hell
of a lot of downtime with the people in my immediate household. I picked
up mixing cocktails as a hobby, given that every bar in the world had
pretty much gone tits up, and quickly ingratiated myself to my friends
and acquaintances as the guy with *all* the liquor who knew how to make
them *real fucking good.*

As all things, this, too, should pass: the new school year was just
around the corner, and I began following board meetings. Our district
failed to organize a plan for *how* or *when* the school year would
begin until late fucking July, literally weeks before the first day of
school. Board meetings were littered with querulous sessions in
discussion with the Tri-County Health Department about what we could or
could not do with classes in person; a vote was taken to bring teachers
and students back in person, *after* the deadline for teachers to sign
their contracts for the year. No formal opportunity for teachers or
students to have a stake in the conversation was provided.

The new year began tenuously: students came in anxious and we, the
adults in the room, had no satisfactory answer to their questions or any
comfort to give to their concerns. Rooms were dismantled and much thrown
away to try and make space for social distancing guidance between desks,
people with Masters degrees became glorified janitors, and rules and
regulations changed on a dime. Quarantines became frequent, and the
crippling effect of having an *entire class* sent home with less than 24
hour's notice became as much of a problem for students as teachers.
Instruction suffered, student learning became borderline non-existent,
absences for family funerals increased, "mental health days" among
students ran rampant, and no accountability was given for lack of
student participation or involvement. We limped along, dragging whoever
we could, as long as we could hold out.

In November our principal informed us that we were being sent home --
not because of the hundreds of students or dozens of teachers rotating
into and out of isolation or quarantine, and certainly not because some
fucking genius in the district office had recognized that a dangerous
and unreliable classroom environment is no place to learn -- but because
our security and admin staff had been quarantined. No one was at the
front office to run the show despite the dozen or so AP's, deans,
secretaries, or other non-teacher bodies in the building. We had less
than 24 hours to inform students via e-mail, Remind, or course page
announcements that we were indefinitely going home.

This was, easily, the darkest period of the year for me. Every day
consisted of staring at an assortment of white names in black boxes for
eight hours, talking into the void about polynomial long division or
trigonometric identities with no reaction, no discernible evidence of
students learning or even *enjoying* the class. My world shrunk to the
size of my room. No jokes, anecdotes, stories, or interactions with my
students. Just blank screens and silence. Add to this: a frustratingly
schizophrenic administration attempting to hold teachers accountable for
an untenable scenario, no interaction with departments and coworkers, no
collaboration. Everyone was scrambling to get a fingerhold and find a
method, a lesson, a tool, or a curriculum that would help their
faltering students and give some demonstrable progress -- or even a
reason -- for this godforsaken year. All this, while battling complete
exhaustion and burnout. We kept this up for three months, until we
returned in person again in February of 2021.

The return to class was, at first, terrifying. Teachers and students
alike were divided about the return and mask enforcement, attendance,
participation in classwork, and *basic fucking etiquette* all became
points of explicit discussion. Teachers were almost roundly ignored in
decision-making withing the building and the district at large. Not
until teachers began receiving vaccines in mid February did I begin
feeling some semblance of hope for salvaging the rest of the semester.
Many of our students were so far gone, and so many teachers combating
real life at home, that everyone, it seemed to me, was just waiting for
May to roll around so we could all just *go home.* Everything that had
given me joy in my work was sapped away more days than not, I was
*always* concerned about my health, and my private life was a shambles
as I tried to learn how to be more present in my (now former)
relationship with my ex, do everything in my power to comfort my Uncle
as his wife died, and tried to keep myself from completely falling apart
every week. I recognized a silent desperation in myself that often came
up on Sunday mornings, as the realization that another week of stress,
grinding, and frustration waited for me. Many days after work, I'd
completely shut the world out, playing videogames, mindlessly surfing
the internet, or even just staring at the wall for hours at a time. I
didn't have the tools, the consciousness, or the ability to change much
of the scenario, so I retreated within my own head to make an attempt at
coping with the daily frustrations, the anger, and the deep and bitter
disappointment. It became harder to be around my friends, maintain my
relationship, and engage in my hobbies.

I often used to crack the joke, in my first year of teaching, that every
week I was trying to "land the plane" with a wing and a prayer; after
the last year, the idiom seemed insufficient.

So I appended.

The year's been like trying to land a plane on a wing and a prayer, with
the one engine on fire.

**Eulogy to One Tough Motherfucker**

My Aunt Pam and my Uncle Pete took my sister, my mother, and I in
shortly after my mom and my Dad divorced around 2000. I was four, my
sister was two. My Aunt and Uncle owned an apartment in Aurora, and gave
a spare bedroom to my sister and I, often watching us during the day,
ensuring we were dressed, cooking and feeding us, helping ferry us back
and forth through the unique hell of every-other-weekend divorce custody
exchanges and making certain we weren't falling behind in school. My
Aunt and my Uncle taught me to read, to count, and to think; one of my
earliest (and fondest) memories of my Uncle involves him, hungover, on
a... Sunday? In winter, tired of hearing me explain the existence of
clouds for the umpteenth time using God. After rolling his eyes, he put
a pot of water on the stove to boil, guided me towards the front door,
and promptly -- and effectively -- demonstrated the intricacies of phase
changes. Watching the steam cloud rise into the air like some acolyte
furtively bearing witness to a forbidden ritual, he punctuated the
awestruck silence, and I'm paraphrasing here, with: "See? There's your
Jesus!". As for my Aunt, I recall Dr. Seuss in the living room. When I
was young, I repeated lines due to a difficulty identifying when to scan
*down the page* at the end of a sentence; as a result, I often repeated
myself like a looping vinyl record. However, I had just mastered the
ability, and my Aunt had mistaken the repetition of Seuss as my error --
imagine my difficulty in trying to convince her, with my limited
capacities at four years old, until handing her the book. I often
remember her humour, her much too quick wit, and limitless patience with
my sister and I as we tormented and frustrated our caretakers like all
children know how so innately and fluently.

They provided a safe home during an immensely chaotic and wildly
unpredictable time in our lives, as the family my sister and I had known
disintegrated around us into fractuous, bitter fighting. Screaming
matches, confusion, and animosity were a hallmark of that period, and
without my Aunt and Uncle, my sister and I would not have survived with
any snowball's chance in hell for a normal life. They acted as parents
and guardians for us when my Mom worked nights, my Dad moved to my
hometown east of Colorado Springs, and our extended families drew rigid,
deep, and vehemently caustic battle lines. I spent twelve years
embroiled in the vitriol and hatred my parents held for each other,
fighting every week against total despair and isolation: my feelings of
loneliness, melancholy, and borderline depersonalization fell on deaf
ears. It was a mortal sin to admit I missed my Dad in front of my mom
and former step-dad, lest I earn an hours-long berating about how
ungrateful, selfish, childish, and *wrong* my feelings were. Anything
nice I tried to make or do for my Dad was met with attempted or
successful redirection, guilt trips, or outright denial. They regularly
played up how well they took care of us, and made a point to demonstrate
*how poorly* our Dad did. My severely infrequent phone calls with my Dad
were monitored. I cried myself to sleep usually one or two nights every
week: were my mom or step-dad to hear me, I would be punished. Our trips
out to visit Dad were contingent on the mood and charity of my two other
parents. They regularly disparaged him, often in front of us, and
sometimes in the company of our family friends. I was once grounded for
threatening to kill my former step-dad after he threatened to harm my
father. The stories I can tell are so numerous and so painful, it's
sometimes difficult to even recall portions of them. The anxiety, fear,
and rage I felt every day in childhood continues to make appearances
well into my adult life.

This went on, without fail, for the near entirety of my childhood until
I told them both to go fuck themselves, that I wanted to live with my
Dad. I outright refused to be part of that family and after 126 days,
they shipped me off to Denver on a nighttime flight Christmas Eve. I
woke up in Colorado Christmas Day 2012, to fresh falling snow in the
place I had called home all my life. I can't recount a day in my life
when I was happier.

My Uncle, whom I look up to and respect more than anyone else on my
Mom's side of the family, was not himself immune to the chaos. I only
later learned my Aunt, his wife, was the only person other than my Dad's
family who advocated for me during this time.

There won't ever be words, acts, or gifts sufficient to repay what they
did for us. These acts of generosity and love continued for all our
lives.

I learned my Aunt was diagnosed with stage 4 breast cancer February of
2016, while waiting for my girlfriend at the time to pick me up from a
night class at Mines. My Uncle called me, and advised me to find
somewhere to sit down -- I walked into the student rec center, and paced
the upper bleachers for an hour while trying to parse and understand the
information my Uncle had given me. Within months, my Aunt had begun an
aggressive treatment plan of radiology, chemo, and surgery
affectionately referred to as the Red Death among recipients. In a
little over two years, after a grueling fight, she entered remission on
a battery of long-term, low-dose chemo drugs. Apart from the natural
consequences of a brutal and extended fistfight with her illness,
continuing to care for her two sons, and -- yes, even then -- looking
after me as I came to her for guidance and help surrounding the most
toxic breakup I've ever heard of, she came out of it holding her head
high, beaming with the smile she was renowned for all her life.

We received the news that she was terminally ill with a resurgent cancer
in February of 2021. The cancer she had fought so resolutely had spread
throughout her body: into her lungs, her lymph nodes, and even her brain
and brain stem. Without immediate and drastic action, it was not known
how long she'd have to get her affairs in order, say goodbye to her
children, and to her husband.

By March, she was under the knife. My Uncle and I sat, three steps away
from blind panic, in the surgery waiting room for five or six hours
before we broke for a quick lunch down the street. He got the call that
her neurosurgeon -- a cocky, self-sure bastard -- had managed to remove
*everything* malignant in her head and brain stem, that she would be
recovering within a few hours, and preparing to transfer into a wing of
the hospital for recovery and preliminary rehabilitation. My Uncle and
I, sat at a bar, were close to tears among strangers; we returned to the
waiting room, where we anxiously waited for another two hours for news,
and until he ultimately knew where she was and told me to go home and
rest.

I was not OK. My elation and joy at hearing how well her procedure went
was rapidly engulfed by the Pyrrhic realization that, no matter what
good news we had, her time with us had now become painfully, tangibly
finite. We knew we had a matter of months, perhaps a couple of years
with any luck, to spend with her and get the family prepared and ready.
I strangled the emotions roiling in my chest and throat as I turned the
key at my front door. My original plan entailed watching the sunset with
a cigar in one hand and something *very* strong in the other, on my back
porch. As is often the case in Colorado springtime, the snow had yet to
melt on the back patio, necessitating a shift in setting: atop a dining
room chair in my front yard, I smoke, drank, and sobbed in the reddening
evening. I'm fortunate that in my covenant-protected, suburban
neighbourhood, nobody's mother or father came to question why some
asshole in his twenties was draining several bottles of whiskey in
hair-raising time and coming unglued for the whole street to see. At
that point, I had long past given my last fuck for the month. The
neighbour's had free HBO that night.

I couldn't remember the last time before that I had quite literally
wailed aloud. My most violent and soul-rending moments had come during
the depths of my grief after my Dad's death; it had been years since the
last episode that left me questioning why I was even alive, laying in
the snow, half freezing, while on the walk home in Golden on my 22nd
birthday. I called my now-ex-girlfriend, hardly able to speak, asking if
she'd come home -- she wasn't available, and wouldn't be down in my neck
of the woods until the next afternoon. I called Josiah and Daniel
Butler, and as meekly as a drunk can, requested that they help me pray
for my Aunt and my family. I hadn't prayed in years, and haven't since
experiencing my first existential crisis in 2015, but they kindly and
gently asked god to watch over her, her boys, her husband, and me. I'll
never have the words to describe how much this meant to me.

I haphazardly dumped all my anger, confusion, hurt, and despair on them
over the phone, while my roommate and my friend Griffin sat with me in
the lawn helping unburden me of a few drinks and my last cigar. I cycled
between racking sobs and repeatedly asking why the world *had to be so
goddamn cruel to my family* while my friends did their best to comfort
me.

I was out there like that, half blind in my delirium and grief, for two
or three hours. Time moved differently that day, and in my state, I was
far from a fair observer. We pulled the chairs back inside, cleaned up
the lawn, and got the house/kitchen back in order. I was sick, took a
bath, and fell asleep on my bathroom floor, wondering in what past life
and what terrible act an ancestor of mine had done to piss karma off so.
After an hour or so like that, I did what I've always eventually had to
do: I cleaned myself up, pounded enough water to alarm even a fish, and
threw myself into bed hoping for an exigent sleep to pull me away from
that day.

Thank you Daniel, thank you Josiah, and thank you, Griffin.

Within a month, my Aunt's condition deteriorated to the point of hospice
care. Under the un-care of the Spaulding Rehabilitation Center, my Aunt
underwent an (which was, much to my Uncle and I's fury, completely
unknown to us) emergency trip to the Aurora Medical Center for
precipitous drops in blood pressure. She never fully recovered the
ability to speak or move with any complete reliability or autonomy, and
struggled to fight, uncomfortably, to stabilize enough to go home. When
we did get her back to her living room she was incoherent, unable to
move or act without assistance, and visibly in pain. My Uncle and I did
our best with very limited information or knowledge to try and make her
as humanly comfortable a woman in agony could be.

On April 15th, she had to return to Aurora Medical Center via ambulance;
I came to the hospital with my cousins -- the very same one she had her
neurosurgery completed a month prior -- to see her, and watched on in
horror as nurses poured into her room to stabilize her as her condition
rapidly declined. My Uncle and a friend of the family stayed with my
Aunt all night, while I brought my cousins home in a snowstorm to get
away from that place. I slept on the couch, thinking I had seen my Aunt
for the last time without saying goodbye, or that I loved her. The
medical staff at Aurora worked non-stop through the night to get her
into condition to die at home, in her bed, with the assistance of
hospice care. Our hospice nurse, whose name reminded me of something
more fitting of a pornstar than the gentle, kind soul she was (Something
Paradise), massaged my Aunt's feet and hands, helped us get her into
bed, medicated her liberally for her pain and discomfort, and kept us
calm and informed on the process one undergoes when one is passing away.
She kept us sane, level, and focused on looking after my Aunt; if not
for her, I can only imagine in my worst nightmares what that day would
have looked like. I promised my Aunt to look after my Uncle and her
children. I told her I loved her, and thanked her for all she had done
for my sister and I. I promised her I wasn't going anywhere, and would
be at her side indefinitely. On April 16th, shortly after noon, I held
her hands, with my Uncle, as we comforted my Aunt Pam for the last time,
told her we loved her dearly, and watched her breathe her last on earth.
She was surrounded by the people who loved her most, listening to the
voice of her mother.

The room smelled of lavender. She loved lavender.

**Not as Handsome as I Never Was, But\...**

I first met Dave, the (later) president of the ATO house at Mines, at
casino night my freshman year at Mines. I walked into the basement of
Green Center with a couple of people from the second floor of Thomas
Hall, looking to make some new friends and have a little fun. School
clubs and organizations had set up card tables throughout the spacious
room, and I saw a tall, lanky guy in a ratty t-shirt and a sharp jacket
sitting at a blackjack table. He looked at us, invited us to sit down,
and we played cards and listened to him talk about greek life for a
couple hours. He invited my friend, Thomas, and I up to the house to see
it, meet some of the members, and chat about our time at the school so
far. I was up until about 1 or 2 in the morning talking to him -- I
still remember distinctly our conversation about Charlie Chaplin's *The
Great Dictator*. Within a few weeks, I was a pledge at the house, and
went out to play cornhole on Kafadar with some of the guys from ATO as
they raised money for charity. Dave introduced me to his parents, and
his sister -- who happened to be cute as hell. I chatted with them some,
played some cornhole, and went about my way.

Such went more than a few incidents with her: within a year, tangential
conversations over physics problems, favourite books, and chance
encounters ensued. I didn't really see her again until almost three
years later during the second half of my senior year, when I began
taking part in the weekly pilgrimage to the Rock Rest Lodge for \$2
pints on Tuesday evenings; I sometimes saw her passing by the windows on
the way in/out, and never failed to wave like a madman when I'd
recognize her in a semi-drunk state. Come April of 2018, I was out
celebrating E-days, our school's yearly extravaganza, with a friend of
mine and her pals, fighting off a hangover I had earned the night
before. I met up with my friend Wolf at some house in south Golden,
where a keg race was in full swing. While shooting the shit, dodging
staggering undergrads in droves, I looked over and locked eyes with her,
in full regalia: pint in hand and a fanny pack that read "PARTY" across
the front, something more a commandment than a statement.

We talked, I added her on Facebook, and we started up a conversation. I
was -- comically unsuccessfully -- trying to get a date with another
girl, but rather quickly realized that I *really* like this girl. Within
a few weeks, I was finding every excuse to meet up with her. I jumped
into an ATO -- Sigma Kappa social (I can't play volleyball to save my
life, but it didn't make a damn difference to me), and not long after
spent about *eight hours* at a frat party talking to her exclusively
throughout the night, admitting to how nervous I was around her and
enjoying every minute of her company. Wolf takes a photo of us three on
his polaroid camera, and it becomes one of my everyday carries in my
wallet: if I were to be found dead on the road, they would see a photo
of my sister, a hand-written letter from my Dad, and a photo of us. I
carried that photo of her for three years, without fail.

A friend of mine, noticing the obvious chemistry, joked about getting
her number if I didn't make a move. Not to be outdone, I asked and she
delivered. We held hands behind our backs, talking until the sun rose;
we grabbed breakfast at the Golden Diner, where I almost snorted coffee
through my nose I was laughing so hard at her puns.

Sometime later, after a drink or two for confidence, I give her a line
about getting up to some fun that night. She asks what I've got in mind,
and I relay something along these lines:

"Let's just say I've got in mind a scenario where I'm making breakfast
tomorrow morning while you're getting dressed in my room.".

She shoots me down, but the texts continue streaming in. She's
definitely interested.

Within a week or two, she invited me out on -- what appeared to me -- a
date; of course, having a face made for radio, a guy like me doesn't say
no. We drove up to the Fisk planetarium together in her Chevy blazer,
and she told me how much she liked men in ties: with a mischievous
glance, she explains it gives her something convenient to grab onto when
she got close to them.

Hook. Line. Sinker.

We watched the planetarium's rendition of Stranger Things' soundtrack,
toured the CU Boulder campus, and I invited her back to the Golden Moon
Speakeasy for a drink or two. The night went so smoothly, I was near
giddy. I grin, ear to ear. We sat down at a booth, and I asked if she
had ever heard of the 36 questions for love. I joked that, being two
students from Mines, we'd need to test the set, empirically; she agrees
emphatically. We talk for an hour or two, working our way through the
list, and get to a point where we need to share three things we think
are true about both of us in the moment. She gives me a line that we're
two attractive people, and we're having a great time. I grin from ear to
ear, and invite her to finish answering the questions back at my place
where I can mix us a couple more drinks. We go, I put a gin mule in her
hand, and we continue.

I open up about my Dad's death; she comforts me, opens up about her own
past, and immediately I can feel a deep bond beginning to form. We make
it through the final questions in the wee hours of the morning, and I
remark that there's, sometimes, one last addendum: to not break eye
contact with your partner for one or two minutes straight. She picks up
the gauntlet, we begin, and I plant a kiss on her not thirty seconds
later.

The rest is history.

We begin seeing each other at the drop of a hat: I blow off studying for
my last final, she ditches homework, and we go get lunch. We grab
drinks, stop and talk on walks to class, and fail to keep away from each
other for any appreciable amount of time. I'm having lunch with my mom
before graduating, tell her about this new girl I'm dating, and, *I shit
you not,* I look out the window over her shoulder and see her coming
down the street, beautiful as anything I've ever seen, in a flattering
black dress. I panic, my mom laughs at me, and mom introduces herself to
her as I smile sheepishly. My graduation happens, she congratulates me,
attends my graduation party, and we spend the entire night talking and
cuddling on the couch.

After I graduate, we make dinner one night, enjoy a few drinks,
slowdance in the living room and get to know each other better. A
thunderstorm rolls through, and she steps out on the back patio, arms
outstretched, eyes closed, and feels the rain fall on her face. She's
gorgeous. We rough-house. She takes me down and lands on top of me, and
I can't help but smile like a fool. I tell her that I'm falling in love
with her. I want something serious with her.

She panics and shares with me the challenges she feels about letting
herself be loved -- she quotes *Perks of Being a Wallflower*: "We accept
the love we think we deserve". I'm panicking thinking I've blown
something good; things are tense for maybe a week or two, but she agrees
to be exclusive with me. She's working through some things around her
previous relationship, and I try to respect her needs while fighting the
anxiety and nerves in my head. She's amazing, and I know I've caught
lightning in a bottle; clutz that I am, I'm terrified of jolting or
dropping it. I write her a love letter. It's one of many over the years.
I learn her favourite flowers and colours, and her favourite candy. We
watch rom-coms. I introduce to her my favourite love song, and it
becomes *our song.* I give her the best parts of me, and she does the
same.

I accompany her on a trip during Father's Day with her family on the Rio
Grande scenic route to a beer festival; we visit her brother who lives
in Denver in a nice apartment near Coor's Field; we generally get up to
trouble. After a fight, she tells me she's ready to be in a serious
relationship in June.

By early July, she tells me she loves me. I was in love with her since I
was flat on my back on the carpet, back in May. I feel the happiest I've
been since I lost my Dad; I feel the happiest I've been *in a very long
time.*

Our relationship is rocky; she's a tempestuous, fiery, stubborn woman;
she'll never take life on its terms without a good jab first. We butt
heads and have minor (and major) disagreements, we step on each other's
toes as we -- never quite right -- learn how to listen to one another,
support each other the ways the other needs, and love the rough edges we
both have. I enter my early experiences with teaching, she completes her
field session for Chemical Engineering and begins her second to last
semester at Mines. Things are passionate, fiery, and dramatic; honestly,
as difficult as it is at times to get along with her, I know deep in my
bones I wouldn't have it any other way. I love her. She levels me with a
look, and with naught but a touch makes my entire day. Knowing I've made
her smile, or laugh, fills me with joy. She's my confidant, and my
partner in crime.

Come January 2019, I'm entering student teaching, which saps all of my
time, energy, and attention; she does her best to support me and push me
along at my low points. There are more than a few nights I fight off an
emotional breakdown by the skin of my teeth, and without her, I don't
know how I would have made it. She finishes college, we attend a special
ceremony honouring the women graduates of Mines, and she receives her
decorations for graduation. I watch her graduate, and am full of nothing
but pride: she's the funniest, smartest, most driven woman I know. She's
spit and vinegar. I never did like demure women -- I wouldn't know what
to do with a woman who couldn't kick my ass, and without a doubt in my
mind, I know she could best me in every way.

I learn to play our song for her: I love the way it melts her heart.
When she looks at me, I know a peace and happiness I haven't felt for
years.

We get up to a multitude of adventures: drunken escapades in Denver for
her birthday(s); inadvertently accept an invite to a burlesque show in
Boulder at a bar/coffee shop/bike repair store/theatre; we celebrate our
(botched) 1st anniversary with our favourite bartenders at the Golden
Moon Speakeasy, who pull bottles off the shelves for us after close, and
get us hammered while we thrash to shitty metal/alt music over speakers
that usually play soft jazz and muzak; random trips looking for a lost
cellphone that ultimately lead us to Fort Collins; \$4 wine nights
watching trash TV; general shenanigans with our new and expanded circle
of friends; endless nights talking for hours, cracking each other up,
sharing our dreams, and reveling in one another. Things are wonderful,
and challenging. I'm growing and living every desire I've had for a
happy, loving relationship with this beautiful, hilarious, kind, and
fantastic woman. I wonder nearly every night why she's chosen a guy like
me, and balk at my uncharacteristically good fortune. I wonder if, and
when, she's going to recognize she can do better.

At one point, I relay to her the terror I feel at the prospect of losing
her after she graduates, as I'm deeply in love with her, want her in my
life, and battling the dissonance of knowing I can't/won't leave
Colorado (she wants to move out of state). I love her more than
anything, and want nothing but for her to be happy. I'm lost on what to
do or how to feel. She comforts me, tells me that she loves me, and that
we should take things one month at a time.

On the anniversary of my Dad's death, I feel intense fear and shame. I'm
ashamed of how deeply and intensely his death still affects me, and
colours and shapes my outlook. I fight to get out of bed, meet the day
with grit teeth a hair's breadth from a breakdown, and come home. She
welcomes me, holds me, comforts me, and makes one of the worst days of
the year -- the memory of the worst day of my life -- bearable.

She wishes me a happy birthday.

I never learned how to thank her for this.

I take her to the El Paso County Fair in my hometown: we dance
two-steps, drink cheap beer, play carnival games, and I show her my
home. I share with her the near mythical stories of my Dad, and open up
to her about how badly I wish I had a place to belong. She helps me
begin building a home and a life for myself, and teaches me that, no, my
life isn't over; that yes, I can be happy again. I move into a new home,
and begin building a space and routines that I can be proud of.

Things begin changing once I start work. As I enter my first year of
teaching in August of 2019, I begin working maniacally hard to ensure
the success of my students, who I'm now entirely responsible for. This
is my first experience teaching on my own, and the first step in my
career. My nerves are through the roof as I overextend myself
volunteering to help coach our school's wrestling program and pouring my
heart and soul into my classroom. She pushes me, supports me, helps me
grade at ungodly and unreasonable times, and does her best to be there
for me when I inevitably make mistakes. She struggles for nine months
after graduating looking for work; she takes a temporary job as a
bartender at a winery in Parker/Castle Rock, moves back home with her
parents, and fights the self-judgment and false shame that comes from
watching many of her friends move into careers. I comfort her: she's a
brilliant, talented, and incredibly dedicated woman, who gives her
entire being to the causes she loves and believes in. I've never seen
any woman so tenacious; I admire her grit every damn day.

Her time will come. This I know deep in my bones.

Come March of 2020, the lead zeppelin comes down; she spends more nights
with me than at home, afraid of infecting her mother or father. I begin
teaching from my living room, and we hunker down together. We begin
seriously discussing her moving in with me (which excites and worries me
to no end), and by the summer we're living together. Our dynamic
changes: I begin struggling badly with the loss of my independence,
attempt to cope with living with another person for the first time in
many years, and badly try to balance my hectic professional and personal
life with her needs as my live-in girlfriend. We argue over petty and
trivial things, like the trash, cleaning the house, and cooking. She
gives me the passive-aggressive routine as I begin volunteering with our
school's wrestling team, something which brings me an immense joy,
accusing me of putting her on the back burner and ignoring her entirely
on how I spend my time. Every weekend I'm with the team, I'm worrying in
the back of my head about how she's going to give me a cold shoulder or
rebuff me, how she's going to listen to my stories about the day cold
and indifferent. I begin feeling unheard and misunderstood; I don't feel
appreciated anymore, or admired. I often feel criticized, and like I'm
failing to make her happy. She begins feeling minimized/ignored in
regard to her thoughts and feelings, like she doesn't have her own space
in our home, and physically disconnected from me. I often feel from her
more disdain than love, unappreciated, and judged. I sometimes feel like
she's just *tolerating* me -- one night, as we're out celebrating my
friend Griffin's birthday, I relay this to her half drunk. I get no
answer. My anxiety mounts rapidly, and the night-long conversations we
used to have become non-existent. We fail to connect, as we come closer
together than we've ever been. I struggle to talk to her, and she
struggles to talk to me. We start walking on eggshells, afraid or
unable, perhaps both, to address the issues that begin cropping up in
our relationship. My mental health begins to decline and I recede into
my own world in an attempt to understand and deal with my own personal
fears, problems, and doubts. I feel like I'm failing her.

The confident person I used to be when we met starts receding.

I learn one of her favourite cocktails, and make a special one, just for
her. A simple pattern, drawn in Peychaud's, across the top lets her know
how I feel.

They come in threes -- all the small, good things.

Dead of night.

Three brake lights.

Your lips pressed on the nape of my neck.

Black inked wrists.

Sticky notes.

I throw her a surprise luau/birthday party at Chatfield Lake in the
pissing rain and cold. How can it be pissing rain and cold in the middle
of *fucking August?* Everyone looks like they're doing their best to be
happy, but she's the only one beaming. It wouldn't be me if I didn't
fuck it all up.

The school year from hell begins in August, and we're invited to a
wedding shower in September; she's received not one, but two job offers
from Hawaii and the Colorado Departments of Transportation. My
coworkers, who adore her, listen in trepidation as she weighs the
decision to remain in Colorado or leave. The conversation turns to me,
and I feel the immense pressure I felt over a year prior.

Do I beg her not to leave, or tell her to make the decision best for
her?

I choose to be the man I want to be someday, and tell her and the
assembled peanut gallery that I love her, and have always supported her
in being the best version of herself she can be. I swallow my fear and
say that I've always, from day one, wanted her to be happy; if that
means she needs to leave, I'm going to be the first person kicking her
ass out the door. I'll never allow myself to stand in her way. I'm not
worth it.

Things become distant and tense from that point onwards. She feels that
I'm distancing and removing myself from our relationship, but what she
doesn't know or understand is how loud and constant the fight in my head
is to try and keep my class from sinking, manage my stress, and fight
back against my fears and insecurities in our relationship. I love her
immensely, and have demons coming up in my mind from my past that I'm
struggling to manage. I'm doing my best, and attempting to look after
myself. I don't think she understands.

She stays in Colorado, but decides to move out into her own apartment in
February. She's wanted a space of her own for years, and I, knowing how
important to her this is, enthusiastically encourage her search and back
her decision. I organize a massive group of my friends and mobilize some
of her own; we move everything she owns to her new place in an
afternoon, help her set up, and let her settle in. I miss her near
immediately: I no longer have my better half with me each night to hold;
no one to share the jokes, joys, and stresses of every day. I cook for
myself, sleep by myself, and spend entirely too much time by myself. I
learn my Aunt is terminally ill not long after she leaves, and I
struggle to cope with looking after my Uncle, helping care for my Aunt,
and manage my own personal life and a dumpster fire of a school year.

She tells me she's afraid we're growing apart; I do the best I can to
visit, plan dates, and spend time with her, in between patching the
holes in a boat that's rapidly taking on water.

She asks me to attend a wedding -- the week before finals for my
students -- in Utah, which I can't be at. I'm deathly worried about my
Aunt, burnt out at work, not sleeping/eating/exercising enough, and at
my near wit's end. It's not the first wedding we've been to. I've
attended three with her before, and don't understand the significance of
this one. She's a bridesmaid. She seeks my feedback on a dress,
repeatedly asks if I can't spare even one day, and eventually leaves. I
mourn my Aunt and support my Uncle; we go to a dive bar in Aurora after
I see a friend of mine in Broomfield, and I get into a heated argument
with my former step-dad. She hears about this and becomes irate,
accusing me of lying as to why I wasn't in Utah. I'm deeply hurt, ask
her to stop calling me a liar, and eventually tell her to leave. I need
her support, and instead I'm met with an accusation. I spend one of many
nights alone, longing for someone to wrap an arm around me and let me
come undone.

I want her to stop yelling at me and instead comfort me. I call her
later, apologize, and do my best to make it up to her by being there
with her and her friends as often as I can. We celebrate a friend of
hers' birthday in Castle Rock, getting drunk playing lawn darts and
getting caught in a thunderstorm. She drunkenly berates me on the walk
home in the rain -- in front of one of her best friends -- and I shut up
and avoid her the rest of the night. I'm hurt, and eventually just
leave. We go to a brewery with some friends of hers from college, and
she openly talks with her friends about how she *almost* fucked some guy
at a frat party in front of me. I bite my tongue and say nothing.

I recognize how deeply the death of my Aunt affected me, and begin
seeking therapy; she says she's proud of me, but will "believe it when
she sees it" as to whether or not I stay with it. I relay to her how I'm
starting a big project to explore my spirituality by going to church
again, and get the same message: she'll believe it when she sees it,
whether or not I actually follow through. I try not to let the words cut
me, but I can't staunch the bleeding. It comes through the gaps in my
fingers.

Two or three weeks later, I fly out with my Uncle to bury my Aunt's
ashes next to her brother in Los Gatos. Her parents have watched two of
their three children pass away before them now. My Uncle is a shambles,
and I have to leave him there in Los Gatos to make a wedding the next
day. We go together. She's in a lovely yellow dress, and she looks
happy. We have a great time, dancing and drinking with my now
closely-knit group of friends. We snap a few photos, including a
portrait under a neon sign reading:

***All you need is LOVE.***

She comes home in tears the very next day and tells me she can't be in a
relationship with me. That I didn't do anything wrong, that there's not
some other guy, and that she loves me deeply; she tells me that she
doesn't recognize or love who she is anymore, she doesn't know what she
wants in life, and needs to learn how to love herself.

I break down, tell her that I want her to be happy; I also beg her not
to leave. She lingers in my room while collecting her things, clinging
to me like something desperate and small, almost whispering how badly
she doesn't want to leave. I'm numb from the shock. At 1:30 in the
morning, I watch the taillights of her Chevy turn the corner behind my
house, collapse on the ground, and sob hysterically until 4. I howl like
the night after my Dad's funeral. Not since then, or perhaps one time
before, do I feel so abandoned and alone. I get on the phone with my
friend Josiah, relay what's happened to him, and begin burning through a
bottle of rye through the burning tears. I don't want to remember. I'm
not sure I want to forget, either. I know for certain that I don't want
to be here, and now.

The next month is a maelstrom of confusion, disarray, and pain. I meet
with, talk to, and spend time with her to try and understand why she's
doing this: she gives me no definite answer, other than "I don't know".
She claims that she needs to be selfish, and look after herself; that
she's given everything she had to our relationship, and has nothing
left; that I don't know or understand her; that she's in the midst of an
identity crisis; that it's unfair to me to try and support her through
this, that she needs to do it alone. I wrack my brain and soul, looking
for every reason, and every problem: I ask more questions, and receive
less answers. I offer solutions and alternatives, only to have every
single one shot down. She gives me mixed signals: she still loves me,
but can't be with me; she still wants me, but doesn't want to be *with
me.* That I make her melt with a wink or a smile, that she'll never
forget me, like she's already gone -- then drive ten miles an hour under
the limit in the slow lane, buying every second she can have with me..
She wants all of *me* -- the pain, the happiness, and everything in
between -- but doesn't want *all of us.*

What she doesn't understand is that *I am us*.

She asks me to comfort her after the memorial service for her
grandfather; we take a massive, three-hundred mile road trip through the
mountains of Colorado, and up through Laramie, Wyoming. I wouldn't be
anywhere else but at her side. On the trip, I heard an echo in an old
train car outside Walden: immortalized inside, I read:

we were ALIVE\
alex and syd, 2020

She yells, cries, and accuses me of being all talk, and no action. Of
never doing enough to support her, or listen to her. Of not backing up
my beliefs or values, of never truly showing her how I felt about her.
She punctuates these accusations with sharp thrusts of her index finger
into my chest. At one point, I'm told that I didn't care. I'm told that
I never prioritized her. I'm told that she wasn't as important to me as
I was to her. She doesn't know how sharp those razors are. I suppose she
never will.

Oftentimes in the same conversation, I'm told that I'm loved, that I'm
wanted, and that she feels better when she's with me; that she could
have seen a life with me, and that I'm the kind of man she'd want to
marry. That I'm the most intelligent, caring, and kind person she knows;
that she's my biggest fan, and always will be. She admires how openly
and without reservation *I am*. She tells me never to change. That I'm
going to make "some woman" happy someday, as if I ever wanted any other
woman than her. I struggle to understand the dissonance of our
discussions. I drive myself half-crazy attempting to crawl into her head
and see the scenario with her eyes. I feebly try to understand her
position as one much like my own when I left for Colorado at sixteen. I
can't -- I can't separate myself from what I want for us, and what is
best for her. I spend many mornings driving home from a night at her
apartment, unable to keep away from her, sleep deprived; another
fruitless attempt to understand and talk about us and wondering if
things will change. On many of these drives, I'm fighting with
everything I have to keep from blubbering while going down highway 93. I
feel used, and what little self-esteem I have left begins to kick up
into the air with the dust behind my Toyota.

I lose eight pounds from stress, I can't eat, I can't sleep, and I can't
shake the sensation that I've swallowed hot coals, and that the best
thing to happen to me in years has walked out of my life. I have
nightmares every night, for nearly a month. I try to recover who I was
before I met her, and recognize that *every part of* me is stained --
often for the better. I drive home from my favourite cocktail bar, or
from a drive to Nederland, screaming at the top of my lungs doing nearly
a hundred miles an hour down the highway through the tears. I sob on the
phone with my family; I sob in front of my Uncle; I sob in front of my
workout group. I dread the repetition of telling our mutual friends and
my relatives that the woman they told me I'd be a fool to let go of has
gone and walked away.

My hobbies become meaningless, and our photographs together do nothing
but remind me of the searing agony I feel in the dark at night and just
before dawn in the morning when I wake. I pace the house nearly every
day, my head racing so fast it becomes a howling dirge without end.
Crying jags come out of nowhere, without explanation or reason. Wounds
from my childhood I thought I had roughly stitched together a lifetime
ago seep, and my fear, doubt, and loneliness comes crawling through the
floorboards.

I'm a failure. I've fucked everything up. I don't feel kind, I don't
feel smart, and I *certainly don't fucking feel like me. I feel
repulsive.* I'm not sure how the hell I'm supposed to feel at home in my
life, *when we built that life together.* For two months, I've become a
revenant of myself, and try to pick the pieces back up and join the
edges of the puzzle back together.

I burned the boat I came in on when I chose to love her. I knew I'd
never be the same going in, and I knew there would be no escape.

Bukowski once said, "what matters most is how well you walk through the
fire."

*Bite me*, you alcoholic *fuck*... give me another poem. Preferably one
of those you wrote about women. I'll need to look for a copy of *Love is
a Dog from Hell* next time I'm in the Tattered Cover.

**What Did We Learn, Palmer?**

In a conversation with my therapist not too long ago, I was sat in my
new classroom, before the first week with students, looking around at
the freshly decorated walls and the neat empty desks. I had finished the
best camping trip of my life in Moab, flown in from North Carolina where
I spent some quality time with my sister, and spent numerous days
hiking, driving, listening to live music, and a heap of time with my
friends. I was anxious about the coming year: everything I've
accomplished in my career, I've done with her at my side. Everything
I've done, from before graduating college until now, was with the
support of both my Aunt and my Uncle, who've never ceased to keep a keen
eye on me. Just about everything in my recent life has been built around
or with the support of my now defunct relationship with my ex, and I
relayed to him my fear and self-doubt surrounding maintaining my
identity after the loss of her, my Aunt, and much of the naivete I came
into the profession with. When I graduated college and went into the
field, I was driven, competent, bold, and both knew and trusted myself
to meet and overcome anything in my path. Right now, I feel dazed,
disoriented, cautious, uncertain, and vulnerable. Old feelings -- some
of which I haven't felt since I was sixteen -- have returned to the
surface, brought out by the abrasion of the last year and six months.
Same old, black dog. Same old tricks.

I once described the same feeling to another counselor, a long time ago.
From my wrestling days, the feeling I've often had before and during
massive change in my life: I'm fighting off my back. I've been fighting
off my back since I was four, and in my life, it's not often I've felt
like I've truly found my footing. I had a brief period when I was
sixteen until I graduated high school and went off to Mines; I had
another, after my Dad's death and a breakup with my high school
sweetheart, before I graduated and entered the Noyce Scholars through
the University of Northern Colorado. That was the same time I met her.
This period extended up until around May of 2020.

Through every one of the crises I've traveled, I've identified
characteristic traits and actions that've helped me get on: the
importance of showing the love to myself I never quite received when I
was young, and giving myself the grace, time, and right to truly *feel*;
the fortune and luck of strong friendship, vulnerability, and shared
support with those who know -- and want to know -- me as I am; and, most
certainly the most important, the stubborn, tenacious act of the *white
knuckle grip*. I've passed through every challenge in the past, and have
come out stronger for it. My experience with my family, with loss, and
with my relationships have made me empathetic and kind toward others; my
experience of marginalization within my family has taught me the power
and essential necessity of knowing and using my voice; my lifelong
battle with melancholy and the anxious, despairing thoughts in my head
inform and motivate the near-unstoppable determination and grit with
which I pursue my interests, my work, and my relationships with others.

Not because of, but in *spite of,* many of the events of my life I've
learned to love. Imperfectly -- the edges I keep are sometimes too
sharp, my words sometimes too jaded and pessimistic. I often joke I'm a
bitterly disappointed optimist: the idealistic streak in me that sees
the best in others, and the potential in all things, remains bold and
alive though often frustrated and disappointed by the realities of
experience and memory. I'll hold tight a little while still.

I haven't the foggiest what purpose or story I'll take out of my
memories now, sat down in the midst of them. I know not who I'll be in
five years, looking back on this period and what stories I'll tell and
to whom. I can't find the silver lining, threading my fingers through
the past six months -- I'm too busy trying to untangle the knots. I *do*
know, however, that there'll still be the little world I've built for
myself; there I'll *be*, working out the next step, addressing the next
hurdle, shoulder to shoulder with the people I'm beyond fortunate enough
to still have in my life. There's a lot of hurt in these last few years.
There's also a hell of a lot of laughter, and more than a little
gratitude.

"*Our most radical changes in perspective often happen at the tail end
of our worst moments... We* need *some sort of existential crisis to
take an objective look at how we've been deriving meaning in our life,
and then consider changing course.*

*\...Sitting around thinking about better values to have is nice, but
nothing will solidify until you go out and embody that new value. Values
are won and lost through life experience.*

... *Learn to sustain the pain you've chosen. When you choose a new
value, you are choosing to introduce a new form of pain into your life.
Relish it. Savor it. Welcome it with open arms. Then act* despite *it."*

*Mark Manson*
