---
author: Joe Hunt
title: Pyrrhus of Algeria
subtitle: On Absurd Heroism
date: 18 April 2020
img: /uploads/Joe_Hunt_2020-04-18.jpg
---

*To forget about the others? How utterly absurd! I feel you there, in
every pore. Your silence clamours in my ears. You can nail up your
mouth, cut your tongue out - but you can\'t prevent your being there.
Can you stop your thoughts? I hear them ticking away like a clock,
tick-tock, tick-tock, and I\'m certain you hear mine. It\'s all very
well skulking on your sofa, but you\'re everywhere, and every sound
comes to me soiled because you\'ve intercepted it on its way. Why,
you\'ve even stolen my face; you know it and I don't! And what about
her, about Estelle? You\'ve stolen her from me, too; if she and I were
alone do you suppose she\'d treat me as she does? No, take your hands
from your face, I won\'t leave you in peace - that would suit your book
too well. You\'d go on sitting there, in a sort of trance, like a yogi,
and even if I didn\'t see her I\'d feel it in my bones - that she was
making every sound, even the rustle of her dress, for your benefit,
throwing you smiles you didn\'t see\... Well, I won\'t stand for that, I
prefer to choose my hell; I prefer to look you in the eyes and fight it
out face to face."*

No Exit, *Jean-Paul Sartre*

After the chaos of the second world war, philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre
and writer Albert Camus. Separated narrowly in few regards, further
developed philosophical discourse on life's meaning with powerfully
emotive writing and oration. Presenting their thoughts in one of the
most destructive eras of history, Camus and Sartre elegantly address
fear, dread, and anxiety common to all people: what purpose do *I* have
in this world? Is it even possible to find it? If not, how do *I*
grapple and ultimately overcome the crises associated with a purposeless
existence?

Sartre's play *No Exit* (1944)*,* and Camus' novel *The Plague* (1947),
ground a sometimes heady and cerebral philosophy into forms that lend
themselves to a more heuristic method. In this essay, we'll explore
similarities in how Sartre's and Camus' characters Joseph Garcin and Dr.
Bernard Rieux grapple with questions and doubts surrounding their lives
that resonate with modern readers. Both men tenuously reconcile
themselves with their realities. Only one, though, demonstrably embodies
the true good put forth by both Sartre and Camus. That is, while both
exhibit entirely human traits and weaknesses, only one can be considered
a paragon of the shared elements of Sartre's and Camus' philosophy.It
would do to understand the fundamental understandings of each approach.

Existentialism is a philosophical school centrally defined by the belief
that existence precedes essence. In atheistic existential thinking,
Sartre states in his lecture *"Existentialism is a Humanism"* (1946):

*"What do we mean by saying that existence precedes essence? We mean
that man first of all exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world
-- and defines himself afterwards. If man as the existentialist sees him
is not definable, it is because to begin with he is nothing. He will not
be anything until later, and then he will be what he makes of himself.
Thus, there is no human nature, because there is no God to have a
conception of it. Man simply is. Not that he is simply what he conceives
himself to be, but he is what he wills, and as he conceives himself
after already existing."*

In this state, man exists according to self-assigned purpose,
responsible not just to himself, but to all men. Through his existence,
it is imperative that he act and determine in the world how he ought to
be. In this state, a man experiences anguish as he attempts to discern
what is good not for himself but for all man, abandonment as he is left
alone and without excuse to be free, and despair as he realizes he may
only count upon himself to determine the truth or authentic value of an
action.

Absurdism, in comparison, shares some of these fundamental
understandings but differs in its understanding of and approach to
lucidity. In *"The Myth of Sisyphus"* (1946), Camus recounts the mythic
struggle of Sisyphus, whose labour in rolling his stone up a mountain
forever proves fruitless. In particular, Camus writes that " If this
myth is tragic, that is because its hero is conscious. Where would his
torture be, indeed, if at every step the hope of succeeding upheld
him?\... it is tragic only at the rare moments when it becomes
conscious". Camus differs from Sartre in that he does not acknowledge
that a man *can* discern a meaning or purpose, let alone that one
exists; instead, the imperative: absurdity and happiness are twins, and
as the world is an entirely human matter, it is what we make it.

No fate cannot be overcome with spite. One must imagine Sisyphus happy.

*No Exit* sets three characters - Joseph Garcin, Inéz Serrano, and
Estelle Rigault - in a sparsely furnished and locked room. Garcin is the
first individual introduced to the reader: while he attempts to identify
a cause for his incarceration, Inéz and Estelle are introduced
sequentially. Over the course of the play, Sartre reveals through his
characters' dialogue that each has committed a moral crime, and is in
fact dead: Garcin was unfaithful to his wife and executed after
deserting the army; Inéz seduced her cousin's wife, resulting in her
murder; lastly, Estelle engaged in a fruitful affair with a man named
Roger, later killing her own daughter and driving her partner to ruin.
Ultimately, Inéz, Garcin, and Estelle realize that each one of them
exists to foil and aggravate another. While Estelle admires and seeks
approval from Garcin, he will not reciprocate due to Inéz damning him
for his cowardice and paucity of character. Inéz is haunted by Estelle's
unrequited affection, she can never garner Estelle's attention in the
way that Garcin does.

Garcin puts it simply: "Hell is -- other people!"

Sartre posits in Existentialism is a Humanism (a lecture he gave
detailing Existentialism to critics) no man may act or exist in
exclusion to any other, as a man exists as "...a legislator deciding for
the whole of mankind...". That is, the decisions of one man decide for
every man; an action taken by one cannot be considered separate from
anyone. Through this notion, Sartre explores the harm each character
brings upon others through their decisions.

In particular, Garcin is tormented by Inéz' recognition of his true
character. Garcin, who stylizes himself as a masculine, intelligent
individual is haunted by his choice to run from his duty as a soldier.
Strangely, he shows little remorse for his transgressions against his
own wife, stating "It was so easy. A word was enough to make her flinch.
Like a sensitive-plant.... I brought a half-caste girl to stay in our
house. My wife slept upstairs; she must have heard -- everything. She
was an early riser and, as I and the girl stayed in bed late, she served
us our morning coffee".

Garcin notes that he can hear and sense the thoughts and opinions of his
wife, friends, and associates still alive on Earth. He observes his
wife, whose lack of overt sorrow over his execution haunts him:

"*They've given her back my things; she's sitting by the window, with my
coat on her knees. The coat with the twelve bullet-holes. The blood's
like rust; a brown ring round each hole. It's quite a museum-piece, that
coat; scarred, with history. And I used to wear it, fancy! \... Now,
can't you shed a tear my love! ... Now she's stroking the coat. Her eyes
are shut and she's feeling with her fingers for the bullet-holes. What
are you after? What do you expect? I tell you I regret nothing."*

Insight is gleaned: he defines himself on false machismo, rather than
the aggregate of his character. Inéz capitalizes: Garcin admits his
choice to run troubled him greatly, leaving bravery in the face of his
execution as his only absolution. But even here he fails: Inéz asks how
he faced death, and he admits "Miserably. Rottenly". In tandem with her
consternation, he must also struggle with the knowledge that those he
left behind will bear witness to his failing. In acknowledging the
effect and inauthenticity of his actions, Garcin's damnation is complete
on both planes. He has failed to will himself to act, and Inéz is
immutable. He is a failed hero.

In contrast, Camus' *The Plague* offers the reader a multitude of
characters who serve as exemplars of various philosophical or
theological outlooks. Set in the city of Oran in French Algeria, The
*Plague* is narrated by Dr. Bernard Rieux, a modest, stubborn and
intelligent physician who assists in the futile attempt to contain an
epidemic of Bubonic Plague. With the help of volunteers Jean Tarrou and
Joseph Grand, Dr. Rieux and Tarrou work.

In *The Plague*, Camus presents readers with multiple heros; only Rieux,
though, embodies the absurd hero.

Tarrou, who abides by a strict moral code and volunteers his service to
his city, doggedly pursues every opportunity to fight back against the
plague. His actions are optimistic, and are generally informed by his
love for mankind. It is not immediately clear whether Tarrou's
enthusiasm comes from an appreciation of the situation, or from his
ignorance of it. Rieux, however, fights the plague as his vocation
dictates.Camus juxtaposes Tarrou with Cottard, a misanthrope who feels
most comfortable surrounded by the suffering and discomfort of others.
Tarrou offers the man multiple chances to assist the city; in each case,
Cottard rebukes all attempts to include him in the fight, instead acting
as a fringe reactionary to serve his selfish ends. While cognizant of
his condition, Cottard refuses to act in spite of it; he instead becomes
a further instrument of the chaos. He forsakes himself.

It is telling of Camus' outlook on Existentialism that Rieux survives
Tarrou. It could suggest that while Camus admires elements of Sartre's
philosophy and allows Rieux and Tarrou to embody traits revered by
existentialism (responsibility to all men, self-determination in a
forlorn condition), he sees potential flaws. Tarrou's efforts are often
circumvented or muted by Cottard's self-interest. Tarrou, despite his
heroism and selflessness, is stricken and killed by the plague he fought
so hard to shield Oran's citizens from - no different, as it were, from
a vagabond or a pauper. Cottard survives the epidemic.

While Rieux suffers through exhaustion and the realization that his
efforts only delay the plague's claim on his patients, he continues to
struggle against the inevitable. Even after the death of Minister
Othon's son in Part IV, which deeply affects every character in the
narrative, Rieux never halts his efforts to comfort the dying and the
infirm. Indeed, the conscious recognition of the absurdity of his
situation fails to deter him from his objective and his purpose,
stating:

"*Yes, you're thinking it calls for pride to feel that way. But I assure
you I've no more than the pride that's needed to keep me going. I have
no idea what's awaiting me, or what will happen when all this ends. For
the moment I know this; there are sick people and they need curing.
Later on, perhaps, they'll think things over; and so shall I. But what's
wanted now is to make them well. I defend them as best I can, that's
all."*

Rieux's struggle is Sisyphean; where Sartre would provide a purpose for
such suffering, Camus spares nothing. In time, the plague does recede
from Oran, but even in this, Camus' resolution is Pyrrhic. When Tarrou
is struck, Rieux takes him into his own home and holds a resolute vigil
over his friend's passing, ignominiously accompanied by brutally cold,
dark nights and an increasingly jubilant Oran. In the coming days, Rieux
receives news by telegraph that his wife has succumbed to illness,
perhaps tuberculosis, in a sanitarium outside of the city. Rieux does
not seek a purpose in existence: in the closing paragraphs of *The
Plague,* Rieux admits his reason for chronicling the plague solely to
"...bear witness in favor of those plague-stricken people...", to be
"...the record of what had had to be done, and what assuredly would have
to be done again in the never ending fight against terror and its
relentless onslaughts, despite their personal afflictions, by all who,
while unable to be saints but refusing to bow down to pestilences,
strive their utmost to be healers.".

The undertaking, he feels, stems from the necessity of being a
physician, not from a hope of ultimate victory: it's a penultimate
footfall reverberating silently, bearing the catafalque of man.

In these respects, an attentive reader will observe elements of both
philosophies embodied in the thoughts and actions of Dr. Rieux. Far from
lacking in empathy, but brutally desensitized from repeated, resounding
defeat, Rieux consciously makes the choice to push on. Garcin, in
contrast, resigns himself in damnation.

It is together, rather than separately, that Garcin and Rieux's
complimentary natures become apparent. If observed independently, the
readers of *No Exit* and *The Plague* possess a singular view for either
Existentialist or Absurdist thought. Together, a reader sees just how
closely each philosophy mirrors the other: elements of Camus' absurd
manifest in the decisions and the actions of Garcin, while components of
Sartre's existentialism shine through in Rieux and Tarrou's volunteerism
and concern for their home. Even so, Rieux embodies the tenets of
Existentialism most acceptable to Camus while contrasting sharply the
fallacies it fails to acknowledge in the Absurd.
