---
author: Matt Vail
title: What Kratos taught me about Creativity
subtitle: How I learned to enjoy the process.
date: 29 April 2020
img: /uploads/Matt_Vail_2020-04-29.jpg
---

*Tentei, nao consegui, mas vou tentar de novo*

-   *Apanhador Só *

I used to think video games were useless. I'd look down on people who
played them, all the while thinking myself magnanimous for my bored
abstinence. There was no greater waste of time in my mind than a round
of Call of Duty, a fortnight battle, or a game of Rocket League. Don't
even get me started on Super Smash Bros. The way I saw it, hours and
hours spent on these games yielded nothing but the elapsing of time. No
skills are gained, no relationships are formed, no progress is made. I
thought video games were worthless. And then quarantine happened.

March 15^th^, 2020: I ask my roommate David if he wants to go halfsies
on a ps4. He says yeah. We talk about how if we're going to buy one, we
should do it soon, in case all the stores close. March 17^th^, 2020:
David texts me "Found a \$300 one at target. Got it + God of War."

And so, it began.

For ten days straight, I was rapt. I spent work weeks playing as Kratos
-- the tormented son of Zeus who must now deliver the ashes of his late
wife to the highest peak in all the realms with his son -- all while
carrying the guilt of patricide on his enormous tattooed shoulders. I
battled dragons and dark elves, frost ancients and fire trolls. I left
slain the sons of Oden and vanquished the progeny of Thor.

It was awesome. But it wasn't easy. A lifetime of shunning video games
has left me somewhat terrible at them. In a game that takes an average
of twenty and a half hours to complete, I would spend six alone on a
single boss battle -- playing until I emerged victorious or my fingers
were too sore to go on. I died over and over again. But that's what made
it worth it. The harder the challenge, the more effort and attention it
required of me -- the more satisfying it was to overcome it. The value
of playing through God of War on medium difficulty didn't come from the
positive outcomes that I accrued for my efforts - it came from the
process putting in effort in the first place.

Now, let's contrast that with how I've thought about another process:
The Creative One.

With creativity, I have often been myopically focused on what my
creative efforts will give me when they are completed, failing to
recognize the value of the process itself. For example: instead of
enjoying the process of singing and playing guitar, I'd often be
elsewhere, thinking about how if the song I write is good enough, it
might get someone's attention. I'd be thinking about how after an open
mic someone might like it and tell me so. Or about how people will want
to buy my songs if they're good enough. And about how if that happens
then maybe I won't have to have a *real job.* Or about how, if the song
is really good, it might get me a pretty girl's attention, and then
we'll get married and have kids and I won't have any loneliness left to
write songs about. That's where I'd be. Elsewhere -- thinking about the
outcomes and missing out on the experience.

This kind of outcome-based motivation has huge consequences. For one, it
is often self-defeating: if I'm obsessed with the outcome of the
creative process, I am more likely to judge my creative efforts
prematurely for their lack of earth-shattering brilliance and abandon
them entirely. What if the song I'm writing isn't good enough to get a
pretty girl's attention? Is it even worth writing? Maybe not, I've often
thought. This has lead to many a night spent watching TV and hating
myself for not writing more songs.

Unlike video games -- creativity does it fact have benefits that could
plausibly be gained. But I've been overly focused on those outcomes, and
it's really hindered me creatively, and robbed me of a ton of time
well-spent completely immersed in the process. With God of War -- I
learned how to actually enjoy the processing of trying, failing, and
trying again. In video games, there are not external outcome to lust
after. That's not true with creativity. You can use it to get laid and
make money -- and that's great. I just can't forget to enjoy myself.
