---
author: Daniel Brandt
title: Why are Christians into Child Sacrifice?
date: 2020-04-30
img: /uploads/Daniel_Brandt_2020-04-30.jpg
---

Right? No, that's probably not how you responded to that title. First
off, let me disclose that I am a follower of Christ (hopefully I didn't
just lose any readers, stick with me). So this isn't a
bash-on-Christians piece, but it also kind of is. We have to be critical
of the world we live in, right? Anyways, let me explain the title. What
I'm referring to is Jesus dying on the cross. No big deal. Well, I guess
if you're not familiar, to Christians this is a really big deal. One of
the biggest deals of the faith. What I'm referring to more specifically
is the image of Jesus as the son of God who died as a sacrifice for the
sins of the world. If you're not in a church, you could just pose this
as a child sacrifice, couldn't you? There is a father (God) and a son
(Jesus). The son is murdered, and Christians believe he was the "Lamb of
God". Like a lamb slaughtered for sacrifice? So God partook in child
sacrifice? Now if I pose it this way, I think a lot of Christians would
get defensive and say something like, "Well it's not really like that,
see this is a very special case...". I mean, I'm sure I've said some
defense like that before. But my big question is: is this how God sees
the crucifixion? In this piece, I'm going to be asking a lot of
questions without many answers. But I hear that's how the ancient Sages
did it, so I'll roll with it.

This grievance came about when I was studying a story at the beginning
of the Bible traditionally called "The Binding of Isaac". It takes place
in the book of Genesis, in chapter 22 starting in the first verse
through verse 19. I'll summarize it here, but I really encourage you to
go look it up and read it to shed light on this and develop your own
perspective. In the context of the story, there is an old man named
Abraham who has just had his first son with his (also old) wife Sarah.
They waited a very long time to have a child, they finally have one, and
they name him Isaac. One day, God calls upon Abraham to test him by
asking him to offer Isaac as a "burnt offering", which basically means a
sacrifice to God. Abraham obeys this call, and he takes his son on a
three-day journey to a mountain to make the sacrifice. On the way up,
Isaac asks, "where is the lamb?" and Abraham responds, "God will provide
the lamb" (obviously lying because he knows what he's going to do). They
get to the mountain, Abraham builds an altar for sacrifice, binds his
son, puts him on the altar and gets out a knife to kill Isaac. At the
last moment, a voice calls from heaven telling Abraham to stop, to not
lay a hand on Isaac. God reveals this was only a test, and a ram appears
that replaces Isaac as the sacrifice. Happy ending, Isaac survives.

So here we have a story that involves child sacrifice. One that ends in
the way any reader would hope, that the child doesn't have to die.
Having grown up going to church, I have heard this story many times and
have gathered a variety of lessons from it. I think the most commonly
highlighted aspect is the faith of Abraham. That Abraham would obey the
voice of God no matter what, even if it meant giving up his only son
whom he has waited so long for and loves dearly. But in recent years I
have found that there are so many more profound implications of this
story, and some of those implications bring me to the crucifixion of
Jesus.

Let's dissect some context around this story. One of the big realities
surrounding the whole book of Genesis, is the portrayal of this God that
Abraham comes to know, and how this God is different from the gods all
around him. Many of the gods of the land of Canaan (where all this takes
place) are angry gods that demand, they take what they want, and they
are unpredictable. But through the narrative that's built in Genesis,
this God who comes to Abraham was a god who was merciful, slow to anger,
giving of grace, and who cared about people. Here in this story is the
contrast of sacrifices. One practice that existed in the land of Canaan
was child sacrifice. If you want details, look up the Canaanite god
Molech, it was some brutal stuff that even continued into the
Greco-Roman age. As Abraham began to learn who this God was, he was
beginning to see that he was different from the gods he knew of. So when
this God asks Abraham to partake in child sacrifice, can you imagine
what he felt? I can imagine him thinking, "but I thought this God was
different. Sacrifice my only child? Maybe I was wrong about this God".
It had to have been devastating! Not only that he was to kill his son,
but also the shattered perspective of his God. But at the same time,
Abraham probably wasn't terribly surprised. He probably kind of expected
this. Knowing the gods of the land, he probably thought demands like
these were bound to come. So Abraham obeys, but not without reluctance.
Based on the locations shared, a lot of biblical scholars believe the
journey should not have lasted three days. So Abraham might have been
stalling. And the whole way he has to deal with his kid, knowing that at
the end of the road Isaac would die, and by his hand. Probably
constantly thinking, "I thought this God was different. What have I
gotten myself into?". But how does the story end? God calls the whole
thing off. Why? Because Abraham *was* right, this God *is* different.
Once again, God reveals himself saying, "I am not like these other gods
you've known. Keep your son, and I will bless you greatly through him".
Pretty epic.

This God of the bible is different from the pagan gods who demand
children to be murdered. Except when he changed his mind to have his own
holy son be brutally murdered and offered up as a sin offering. Wait,
what? No, that can't be right. Is that the Christian narrative? God so
beautifully revealed that he didn't ask for child sacrifice, but when
He's the main character all bets are off and he partakes in a child
sacrifice of the grandest of scales. Well, that is kind of the Christian
narrative I grew up hearing. Why would the principles change just
because God is the main character? Why would he display a different
character between these two stories? Was Jesus really offered up as a
sacrifice by the Father? Do we have an improper view of the crucifixion?
I think I stand by what I said earlier. *No, that can't be right*. I
don't believe the story changed. So what does this mean? Where does this
leave us? I encourage you to search for an answer to that question.
