---
author: Joe Hunt
title: A Civics Lesson I Never Wish I Needed
subtitle: On Liberalism, Protest, Radicalization, And White Nationalism in Modern Politics
date: 1 February 2021
img: /uploads/Joe_Hunt_2021-02-01.jpg
---

Like a lot of people this year, I've had plenty of time on my hands with
which to devolve into unproductive habits: cruising Reddit for hours on
end, often into the early hours of the morning or in bed at night; binge
watching Netflix television series -- some of which deserved the
dedication, some not; reading, reacting to, and becoming unreasonably
angry about political headlines on biased news websites; fretting,
worrying, and perseverating on global events I have no hand in
influencing or changing. I've spent a great deal of time delving into
new hobbies and revitalizing my interest in old ones.

Like many people, I've read headlines from February onwards that threw a
pipe bomb into civil discussion within my friend groups and household.

On February 23rd, a 25 year old black man was chased down by men with
shotguns in Georgia and murdered -- on camera -- by three white men for
running along a public road in the wrong neighbourhood. It took two
months for any legal action to officially be taken by the state of
Georgia (all this amounted to, by the way, was the recusal of a
prosecutor due to knowing one of the killers and handing over the
investigation to the FBI), and this, only after the posting of the
recording on the internet.

On March 13th, police entered the apartment of Breonna Taylor and her
boyfriend in Louisville, Kentucky during a no-knock raid -- searching
for Taylor's ex-boyfriend on drug charges -- and were fired upon as
intruders. They blindly shot back into the house, killing Breonna while
she slept. No search of the house was ultimately conducted, as it was
determined that the police had no reason to search the building in the
first place; her boyfriend was briefly charged with assaulting an
officer with a deadly weapon while defending himself, and a grand jury
failed to indict any of the officers involved in her death.

On May 25^th^, George Floyd was approached by three police officers in
Minneapolis, Minnesota on suspicion of using counterfeit bills while
buying cigarettes, taken into custody, and eventually prostrated where a
white police officer, Derek Chauvin, knelt on his neck for eight
minutes, forty-six seconds, choking him to death.

The last year has been bleak, by many standards. Waking up in May and
reading about these stories in the news coloured the entire summer for
me. Outraged and incensed by yet another series of news stories of
violence -- police or otherwise -- against black Americans, I joined
many people in feeling disgust, anger, and bitter disappointment with
America. News stories flooded headlines about protests, peaceful or
otherwise, throughout the US as thousands of Americans displayed their
contempt at the failure of American society and law in addressing the
ugly face of our country's history. In May, I watched Trevor Noah add
his own thoughts to the national discussion regarding race, from a video
he posted on "the daily social distancing show" on YouTube May 29^th^:

*"... but if you think of being a black person in America... any place
where you're not having a good time, ask yourself this question when you
watch these people: what vested interest do they have in maintaining the
contract? Why don't we all loot? ... because we've agreed on things.
There are so many people who don't have... think about how many people
who don't have say 'you know what? I'm still going to play by the rules,
even though I have nothing because I still wish for the society to
exist. And then, some members of that society, namely black American
people watch time and time again how the contract that they have signed
with society is not being honoured by the society that has forced them
to sign it with them...

A lot of people say, what good does this do? What good* doesn't *it do?
What good does it do to loot target? How does it help you to not loot
Target?"*

When I first saw Noah's video, I couldn't agree more. My secondary
reaction was to educate myself and refine my stance on the issue, and
try to understand why, in its most extreme sense, my instinctual
reaction to these events -- and further events surrounding white
nationalism and American politics - of the last year have been so
heavily influenced by rage, contempt, and a refusal to understand the
issues holistically or consider the alternative arguments.

In essence, over the last six months, I've been reading, thinking, and
trying to come to terms with an emotion I think many of us share this
year, as we reel from day after day of headlines which make us ask "what
in the ever-loving *fuck* is wrong with this world?": that these
problems require drastic, unilateral, and sometimes necessarily violent
solutions, and that nobody but ourselves are going to provide them.

This stance is reprehensible, intractable, and dangerous; it is also,
given enough reinforcement, natural. If you do not traverse the
emotional landscape such thinking paints, understand its causes and
address the root issue within yourself, it will alienate you from your
community, damage your relationships with the people you love, and drive
your further into a dark pit in your mind which may ultimately become
impossible to drag yourself out of.

**Classic Liberalism -- A Philosophical Cornerstone**

*"My purpose is to consider if, in political society, there can be any
legitimate and sure principle of government, taking men as they are and
laws as they might be."*

*\~ Jean Jacques Rousseau,* The Social Contract

After watching Noah's video, I almost immediately ordered from Amazon a
copy of John Locke's *The First and Second Treatises of Government* and
Jean-Jacques Rousseau's *The Social Contract*. I had seen in two places
(the other being Last Week Tonight's John Oliver) an argument addressing
social contract theory -- a political theory in which individuals
exiting the state of nature and entering into social life agree to
written and unwritten agreements on fundamental rules, regulations, and
norms in order to advance their own interests and the common interest of
all participants. Many writers, from the 18^th^ century on, have weighed
in on the topic, and an exhaustive list of the dialogue here is
impossible. For my own interests, I was curious to know what, exactly,
the social contract is, how it comes about, and what consequences it has
for society when it fails to serve the common good of the people.

**Rousseau -- The Social Contract**

Rousseau writes that the social contract is, first and foremost, is an
abrogation of man's rights in the state of nature: man in the state of
nature has only one interest, that of his own (and his children's)
survival and the provision thereof. In this state, man is war-like,
territorial, and possessive, but also innocent: the notion of "the noble
savage", while fraught with perilous racial undertones in history, is
something like man as Rousseau describes him. The conflict of one
individual with another, he defines as the state of war -- a state in
which man does not enter unless in defense of property, necessary for
the survival of the individual or the individual's familiars. In this
state, man is ignorant of both liberty and their own faculties. When
concerned only with survival (something Maslow would certainly attest
to), no higher principals may exist. It is, however, a natural and
perhaps inevitable shift that men, eventually, recognize the need for
harmony among competitors, and civil law is a natural consequence. Like
children in relation to fathers, the surrender of individual, natural
freedom is advantageous and serves our goals better than natural
struggle, so we sacrifice our natural rights for those accepted in
society. In particular on the topic of inequality, the submission to
civil law "substitutes.. a moral and lawful equality for whatever
physical inequality that nature may have imposed on mankind...".

In return for the loss of natural rights, men gain civil rights; they
reserve the right to found, upon right of the sovereign, law that rules
and dictates the organization and function of society in order to serve
their needs. Particularly, the social contract is the natural answer and
solution to the necessity of preserving each man's own strength and
natural liberty, which are the means of his preservation, without
imperiling himself. As each man gives himself to the common, he
therefore gives himself to no one man. Likewise, there is no one whom
does not now have the same rights as him. Men are responsible for
remaining active members of this society, as the only true and valid
right to rule remains, ultimately, with the people. In fact, he writes
"a people is a people even before the gift to the king is made. The gift
itself is a civil act; it presupposed public deliberation".

![](./media/image1.png)

Figure 1: The People and the Sovereign

Of interest in book 1 is Rousseau's rebuttal to the notion of "might
making right": he writes about early notions of mankind in nature in
Hobbesian terms ("men akin to cattle"), and to Aristotle's claim that
men are created inequitably, with some born to slavery and others to
become masters. Even so, no slavery has ever been natural, as no man has
a right to divest himself of his liberty; such divestment is by force,
and perpetuated, at worst by slaves, by their own cowardice and failure
of duty towards themselves. The natural consequence, then, is that
yielding to force is an action of prudence, the "\...strongest man is
never strong enough to be master all the time, unless he transforms
force into right and obedience into duty". As soon as force is no longer
able to be utilized, all pretext to duty by the enforced is void, and
one is no longer responsible for obedience. By a similar argument,
Rousseau declares that -- apart from the state of nature -- war is an
act between states, and that a just state (or the prince, the state's
executor) cannot justifiably lay claim to the property, liberty, or
lives of a state's people within or without the state of war.

Of the organization of such a people, Rousseau writes of sovereignty
that it is indivisible and restricted only to the general will of a
people. After all, it is only in the common interests of all involved
that natural liberty is sacrificed; the laws of a state, insofar as they
serve the general will, reconcile a particular with it. Laws generated
in this way represent political laws by definition, and fall into three
categories: civil, criminal, and moral law. These laws exist as acts of
the sovereign used to address concerns of particular interests and
conflicts, as the general will, by definition, cannot engage in
particular issues. And insofar that individuals have agreed to form a
society, they are subject to these laws -- *even if their particular
interests tell them otherwise* -- as their own association with society
is participation in the general will and therefore the particular will
of law. An individual's act against the general will or the law (for
example, the refusal of participation with the social pact) is itself an
act of war, and such an individual is subject to punishment. Note,
however, that the individual is to be punished only insofar as it is
necessary to restore him to the general will; he ought to be "forced to
be free".

From the deliberations of a well informed people, Rousseau writes the
will of all (private, individual wants) can be compared with the general
will (the best interest of the people) and the result is what should
drive political law. It is important, however, that no "sectional
associations" or factions be allowed to exist -- or, at least, that they
be as numerous as possible to prevail against inequality.

In a similar vein, Rousseau doesn't fail to address the issue of
executive versus legislative power: to the latter, he assigns the duty
of the people -- as the only legitimate government, the sovereign -- to
enact fundamental, political law; to the former, he assigns the
execution of such law. Executive power, by definition, "cannot belong to
the generality of the people as legislative or sovereign, since
executive power is exercised only in particular acts ... outside the
province of law". A state necessarily needs a government, which serves
as this intermediary body -- and often confused with the sovereign -- to
maintain civil and political freedom. Members of the government are
termed magistrates, who use the public force of the sovereign to enforce
obedience to their general will. Rousseau notes that government itself
has its private interests (self preservation, as perhaps its largest),
but that it must remain committed to the duty of sacrificing itself to
the people. Signs of a good government include the increase and
provision for growing citizens is perhaps the easiest definition; moral
considerations are difficult, particularly as not all governments are
suited to all peoples.

Inevitably, it is important to note that government can and does exert
itself against the sovereign will, and at some point begins to act
against the social contract. Insofar as the government does so, *the
people are no longer subject to rule of the government*, as the
sovereign itself dissolves and the people are subject by force to
obedience. Such a state is anarchic in nature. Rousseau, taking men as
they are, makes due note that it is impossible to guarantee a lasting
and eternal constitution: only through the legislative power of the
sovereign is the state able to endure, and it is instead better to allow
for the dissolution of the government in order to continue serving the
general will -- which laws, as acts of the general will, may sometimes
be found lacking or contrary. Rousseau, quite cogently, reminds us that
the sovereign only acts to further the general will; it does not,
necessarily, always know what that general will is. "the moment the
people is lawfully assembled as a sovereign body all jurisdiction of the
sovereign ceases; the executive power is suspended, and the person of
the humblest citizen is as sacred and inviolable as that of the highest
magistrate".

**John Locke -- The State of War, Actions against the Government**

*"Whosoever uses force without right, as every one does in society, who
does it without law, puts himself into a state of war with those against
whom he so uses it; and in that state all former ties are canceled, all
other rights cease, and every one has a right to defend himself, and to
resist the aggressor".*

*John Locke,* Two Treatises of Government

On the state of war, John Locke defines it as "a sedate settled design
upon another man's life" which exposes his life or property to the
other's power; within the state of war, the fate of the innocent man is
to be preserved above all else, and an aggressor in such a state has
forfeited all right to life or property. It is also natural to deduce
that aggressors in a state of war have no other intent than absolute
power over an individual, and must be supposed to have a design to take
away everything from a man if he has an intention of limiting his
freedom. In this state, there exists no common superior to appeal to for
remediation/arbitration. Quite naturally, men want a common mediator;
without the presence of any authoritative source for justice or peace,
though, this state perseveres indefinitely, and is perhaps the first
reason for an agreement between men to renounce natural liberty for
those of civil life. Since this need for freedom from absolute and
arbitrary power -- a natural right -- is so imminently necessary for
social life to exist, no legitimate state may exercise a right over
another's life: "This is the perfect condition of slavery, which is
nothing else, but the state of war continued, between a lawful conqueror
and a captive... no man can, by agreement, pass over to another that
which he hath not in himself, a power over his own life".

![](./media/image3.png)

Figure 2: desires in the state of nature, pushing to civil law

Of the opposition of the prince (Rousseau's magistrate; the executive
power): the power of the prince may be opposed insofar as "force is
opposed to nothing, but to unjust and unlawful force; whoever makes an
opposition an any other case, draws on himself a just condemnation both
from God and man". *Given that the executive is invested with the right
to execute the law as written by the people, it is counter-productive to
claim that the people may counteract their own interest. However, if the
unlawful acts by the magistrate persist and have no remedy in law or be
obstructed, men as a polity may resist only insofar as its in the
general will of the people*; even organized groups of men acting against
unlawful actions by the government, may not themselves engage in actions
disturb the legitimate rule of the people, lest they dissolve the
society. Locke is quick to note, though, that i*f the unlawful action
act against the majority of the people or if the consequences of the
government against a few offend all involved, there is no case he can
envision in which he can reasonably say the people are obliged to
maintain their society or the government. He states later that it must
be a careful decision whether to dissolve government or society, and
that the dissolution of the people is either an act of a foreign power
or an act of the government to 1) set up as arbitrary their own will
against the people, 2) the prevention by the government of the lawful
assembly of the people and acting freely for the general will, or 3) the
elections or process of election by the people are altered without their
consent*.

"... such revolutions happen not upon every little mismanagement in
public affairs. Great mistakes in the ruling part, many wrong in and
inconvenient laws, and all the slips of human frailty, will be born by
the people without mutiny or murmur. But if a long train of abuses,
prevarications and artifices, all tending the same way, make the design
visible to the people, and they cannot but feel what they lie under, and
see whither they are going; it is not to be wondered, that they should
then rouze themselves, and endeavour to put the rule into such hands
which may secure to them the ends for which government was at first
erected".

**A Brief History of Iniquity**

*"You deplore the demonstrations taking place in Birmingham. But your
statement, I am sorry to say, fails to express a similar concern for the
conditions that brought about the demonstrations. I am sure that none of
you would want to rest content with the superficial kind of social
analysis that deals merely with effects and does not grapple with
underlying causes. It is unfortunate that demonstrations are taking
place in Birmingham, but it is even more unfortunate that the city\'s
white power structure left the Negro community with no alternative.*

*In any nonviolent campaign there are four basic steps: collection of
the facts to determine whether injustices exist; negotiation; self
purification; and direct action. We have gone through all these steps in
Birmingham. There can be no gainsaying the fact that racial injustice
engulfs this community. Birmingham is probably the most thoroughly
segregated city in the United States. Its ugly record of brutality is
widely known. Negroes have experienced grossly unjust treatment in the
courts. There have been more unsolved bombings of Negro homes and
churches in Birmingham than in any other city in the nation. These are
the hard, brutal facts of the case. On the basis of these conditions,
Negro leaders sought to negotiate with the city fathers. But the latter
consistently refused to engage in good faith negotiation...*

*\...You may well ask: \"Why direct action? Why sit ins, marches and so
forth? Isn\'t negotiation a better path?\" You are quite right in
calling for negotiation. Indeed, this is the very purpose of direct
action. Nonviolent direct action seeks to create such a crisis and
foster such a tension that a community which has constantly refused to
negotiate is forced to confront the issue. It seeks so to dramatize the
issue that it can no longer be ignored. My citing the creation of
tension as part of the work of the nonviolent resister may sound rather
shocking. But I must confess that I am not afraid of the word
\"tension.\" I have earnestly opposed violent tension, but there is a
type of constructive, nonviolent tension which is necessary for growth.
Just as Socrates felt that it was necessary to create a tension in the
mind so that individuals could rise from the bondage of myths and half
truths to the unfettered realm of creative analysis and objective
appraisal, so must we see the need for nonviolent gadflies to create the
kind of tension in society that will help men rise from the dark depths
of prejudice and racism to the majestic heights of understanding and
brotherhood. The purpose of our direct action program is to create a
situation so crisis packed that it will inevitably open the door to
negotiation. I therefore concur with you in your call for negotiation.
Too long has our beloved Southland been bogged down in a tragic effort
to live in monologue rather than dialogue."*

*Martin Luther King, Jr. -* Letter from a Birmingham Jail*, April 1963*

The impetus for this essay was Trevor Noah's rhetorical question: why
shouldn't black people loot? Before fully involving ourselves in the
response to the question, I think it's critical to fully understand the
history behind and justification for such a statement.

American history -- even that not so far in the past -- records a
plurality of instances in which equal protection under the law for black
Americans has no guarantee. It wasn't until the American Civil War
(1861-1865) that the topic of slavery was addressed in America, and even
here, a pragmatic reading of American history will highlight concerns
outside of whether slavery itself was a moral abherration: significant
issues at the time surrounding state power, representation, and the
expansion of anti- or pro-slavery politics in the American west. Up
until the war broke out, bitter debate among lawmakers ran rampant
regarding the constitutionality of establishing slave states, often
driven by a fear of decreasing northern influence in government.

Even after the bloodiest American conflict in history, the United States
would have to endure another century of political and sometime literal
conflict surrounding the transition for black Americans from slaves to
freed men and women. Following the Civil War, southern states were
hothouses for vehemently partisan political initiates targeted at
limiting the political rights and powers of not only black Americans,
but also of Republican politicians who were involved in lawmaking.
Reconstruction in the south ultimately suffocated, driven out by
Democratic resurgence in politics, and the implementation of the
infamous Jim Crow laws, policies designed specifically to limit/restrict
black American votes and political influence through the use of poll
taxes, literacy tests, or outright disenfranchisement. Campaigns driven
at the local and state level were often supplemented by violent actions
by white supremacist organizations. Black Americans suffered for decades
under a system of segregation, which divorced them from the rights given
to them after the war and were legitimized under *Plessy v. Ferguson
(1896)*.

Not until the 1950's would the constitutionality of such racist
segregation laws come under attack. With the supreme court ruling in
*Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954),* the doors were opened
for serious action to be taken by state/federal governments to begin
dismantling and tearing down Jim Crow era laws and to properly reinforce
the rights of black Americans in society. Within a decade, massive
movements led by Black leaders like Martin Luther King, Jr. (who was
monitored closely by the FBI and assassinated in 1968), the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference, the National Association for the
Advancement of Coloured People, Rosa Parks, and -- yes -- Malcolm X
(assassinated in 1965) had entered the public consciousness. Massive
protests, demonstrations, and marches occurred during the civil rights
movement that drew a clear and uncomfortable picture of the inequities
present within American society. Widely televised police beatings and
attacks on peaceful demonstrations galvanized action by Americans, and
the civil rights movement, already becoming a juggernaut in and of
itself, was joined by many white Americans ready to set a new precedent
in America. The American government, feeling the pressure, signed the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 which forbade discrimination on sex, race,
colour, religion, or creed; following shortly after, the Voting Rights
Act of 1965 outlawed the use by states of segregationist poll taxes,
literacy tests, or other countermeasures in limiting the vote of black
Americans. The passage of these laws was, to put it lightly, a
contentious topic: numerous instances of federal involvement in state
politics and affairs can be found in regards to the events of
desegregation in our country, with varying degrees of success. Even now,
fifty years past the passage of these laws, evidence can be found of the
revenant of segregation playing a hand against the enforcement of the
self-evident truth that yes, indeed, all men and women are created
equal.

What follows are topics not reliably taught in American history
textbooks, especially for children. Perhaps due to proximity, or perhaps
to still smouldering ideological differences, we see a continuation of
violence against and by black Americans; in 1968, Martin Luther King,
Jr. was assassinated, sparking nation-wide riots and protests which led
to significant destruction in numerous American cities; following
criticism of the methods of peaceful protest, the 1970's saw the rise in
power by the Black Panther Party, which advocated for social change and
the empowerment of black Americans. While ultimately a response to the
violence and disenfranchisement of black Americans, the party engaged in
retaliatory assassinations against police officers throughout the '70's,
and was the subject of multiple internecine, conflicts which led to the
split in and decline of their influence in American politics. In 1992,
widespread riots in Los Angeles, California, occurred injuring thousands
after four police officers were acquitted of charges in the brutal
beating of Rodney King, a black man during an arrest.

In more modern history, the murder of Trayvon Martin and acquital of his
killer, George Zimmerman, in 2012 became a catalyst for the formation of
the Black Lives Matter organization, which advocates for peaceful and
non-violent protest against police brutality against black Americans.

**A Statement on Violent Protest**

I'll be the last person to tell you that this is either an exhaustive or
fully nuanced and accurate analysis of American history. My area of
expertise has never encompassed the analysis of primary source
documents, thorough and meticulous searches of national or library
archives, or first-hand accounts from people with direct experience of
the issues surrounding racism, police violence, or inequality in our
country.

The truth is this: I'm an average American, with a little too much time
on his hands, and a reliably quick internet connection.

Even so, there's a certain appalling characteristic, a dark *je ne sais
quoi* I feel at even a cursory foray into the history of my country: it
doesn't take much effort at all to unearth a troubling and disturbing
list of dates, events, names, and ideas surrounding a longstanding
tradition of violence against black Americans. For the last year, as
I've taken an increasingly closer look at things, I've struggled with
the revulsion I feel at the state of society; I can't but help think to
myself, after listening to reports of violent protests (which, by the
way, [make up less than 7% of the 7,750
demonstrations](https://time.com/5886348/report-peaceful-protests/)
across the country) and watching police gas, beat, and shoot at
demonstrators for a better equality among American citizens: at what
point are these people going to become fed up and *start shooting back?*

This is far from an unprecedented phenomenon: American history has, at
its basis, the violent rebellion as a nation against the British as one
of it's mythological cornerstones, in which Americans firing upon
British soldiers, the marginalization and punishment of loyalists, and
engagment in open war for sovereignty on the international stage is the
summit of American patriotism and self-sacrifice. Even among some
Americans viewing the Civil War as a response to and rebellion against
the increasingly large federal powers of the government and the defense
of state's rights, the killing of Americans was seen as a necessary evil
to defend a way of life founded on slavery.

It's only when the topic shifts to the right of black Americans -- and,
perhaps, the other Americans willing to support them -- to protest,
violently, if necessary, the infringement and disproportionate violence
against them that the discourse turns to one of "rioting".

It's an argument with a strong basis. From the onset of our nation's
history, an entire class of people have been repeatedly and forcefully
written off into the margins; widespread and effective stratagems have
been employed on a legal or para-legal level to ensure that, even up
until recently, every measure was taken to ensure that black American
rights came second to those of others. It is a well-documented truth
that, at the height of the civil rights movement, the American
government was deeply interested in monitoring, tracking, and
countermeasuring the actions of advocates for civil rights: COINTELPRO,
a notorious FBI program responsible for the monitoring, harassment, and
intimidation of Americans, is but one example. The expansion of the
rights and freedoms of many Americans has been the explicit interest of
many organizations throughout the country temporally and spatially. When
an eye is turned to the outcomes and results of peaceful demonstrations,
like those engaged in by the late representative John Lewis, its an
exercise in noting a frustratingly slow, gradual acceptance of facts
that ought to be patently obvious to everyone in acceptance with our
national creed. It is no surprise that followers of Malcolm X, as just
one example, set a precedent for violent protest -- if necessary -- to
defend the rights of American citizens in a country covertly and overtly
hostile to their exercise that was followed by other organizations, like
the Black Panthers, which acted against the tenets of societal life.

It's here that, despite the siren call, we must advocate against the
external argument of action against the system and, necessarily for,
that within if we wish to stand any fair chance against the dissolution
of our nation.

In previous pages, I outlined some basic tenets laid down by John Locke
and Jean-Jacques Rousseau.

A fundamental basis is that of the argument against the right of rule by
force: Locke and Rousseau both beautifully and unequivocally assert that
no truly righteous or legitimate right of government by man can be
founded upon the threat of force. It follows naturally that, as Locke
would have argued elsewhere, that nowhere else finding a legitimate
claim that one man has some divine or paternal right to sovereignty over
another (despite some claims by modern and not-so-modern demagogues),
that it is a grotesque and inconceivable event that a man can claim
dominance or superiority over another through slavery. A man in
submission is bound by no true obedience to a man threatening him: a man
in fear may justify, pragmatically, that a state of servitude is better
than a state of death, but upon the end of the threat of force, he is,
most fundamentally, obligated to liberate himself. Man is created free;
in the state of nature, he is primarily concerned with the defense of
self and of property, which is defined as his rightful possession as the
product of labour from the natural world around him. The only threat
upon him is the threat upon his life or property, and at the end of such
a threat, he is not obligated, under any argument, to obey another.

Here we find a justification so basic, so obvious, that it's enshrined
in the Declaration of Independence:

*"The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America,
When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people
to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another,
and to assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal
station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature\'s God entitle them, a
decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should
declare the causes which impel them to the separation.*

*We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created
equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of
Happiness.\--That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted
among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed,
\--That whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these
ends, it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to
institute new Government, laying its foundation on such principles and
organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to
effect their Safety and Happiness..."*

Going further: men in the state of nature are in want of four crucial
needs, which cannot be sated naturally. In the state of nature (which,
I'd argue, can be interpreted rather closely perhaps with the state of
anarchy) men have no recourse to wrongs, and are only rightfully
entitled to the righteous correction by force of an infringement on
their rights by the power they possess within themselves. This is deeply
problematic: Rousseau and Locke both agree that such a state is brutish,
vile, and incorrigibly destructive without end. A system in which men
are at war devolves into an interminable squabble of injured parties,
laying waste to one another indefinitely without end -- how can there
be? Thus, a natural transition in which the sacrifice of natural rights
are transmuted into civil rights among a polity is a consequence of the
failings of natural law; men are willing to reduce their natural,
personal rights for the stability of and mutual defense of basic,
fundamental tenets shared in common by a body with the power to execute
the consequences prescribed by law.

A notable characteristic, which many attribute to social contract
theory, is the fact that one mustn't necessarily explicitly agree to
(literally or ceremoniously) abrogate their natural rights: *the simple
participation in social relationships, enjoyment of its product, or
reliance on and benefit from its law require one to become subject*.
This is the heart of my first diagram, in which I illustrate Rousseau's
description of the sovereign.

This is a contentious point. One mustn't necessarily agree to the
contract to be subject to it; as a result, it is therefore unlawful to
attempt to justify the participation in violent insurrection or protest
against the society founded by the people. Criticism of the Black Lives
Matter movement, ANTIFA, and the protests across the nation focus on the
destruction of local property, public spaces, and even installations of
artwork (see: the defacement of a statue commemorating the Armenian
Genocide here in Denver), not to mention the instances of harm inflicted
on police. In this, criticism of the movement is well founded: as people
attempting to defend and draw attention to a perceived or real deficits
in their rights, they are, necessarily, defining themselves as both
subject and non-subject to the rule of the people. By claiming that
society is unjust, they are removing themselves from its rule, and thus
the rule of law -- while simultaneously advocating for their inclusion
within it! This is absurd. Either *one is or is not subject*, and the
declaration of non-subjection is a rather terrifying claim to make. The
state of nature is a violent, disgusting, and bleak existence, and will
initiate a horrifying chain of events within civil society that could be
the vanguard of dissolutions with unintentional and far-ranging effects.
Advocates for violent rebellion would do well to keep this in mind.

Even further: Rousseau and Locke both do well to state an unfortunate,
inevitable fact: men are human. Rousseau, writing as he does, decides to
take men "as they are", in full recognizance of our shortcomings and
failures: he outlines the sketch of just government by the people, while
occasionally peppering his work with the recognition and description of
the limits of man. It is inevitable that, at some time, dissolution of
government becomes necessary as the prince or magistrate -- the
legitimate role of the executive in government, established by the
people -- becomes corrupt, self-interested, and self-serving. Human
history is dotted with failed republics, democracies, empires, and
kingdoms; Rousseau, and even Locke, didn't have far to go to draw a
faithful rendition of the conditions in which these governments grow. As
such, both authors had much to say about the dissolution of government,
especially in legitimate ways as the legislative/sovereign/people
reclaim power and institute for themselves a new government (this too,
found in the Declaration of Independence).

In the same vein, an interesting counter-argument for the illegitimacy
of violent protest is this: violent protest, at times (and supported by
our quoted authors) necessary for the defense of the people, can be
legitimate in reaction to a corrupt government/magistrate. Such is the
argument of many organizations throughout American history: the American
patriots of the 18^th^ century, the confederates of the 19^th^; and many
reactionary groups, both black and white, in the 19^th^ and 20^th^. It
could, perhaps, be argued that movements by groups such as the Black
Panther Party, Black Lives Matter, or even the Nation of Islam are
reactions to corrupt government no longer acting in the interest of the
general will of the people: to this, I respond, that it is the most
dangerous and nuclear of options.

A proper government, elected and legitimized by the general will, has as
its interest no other than the defense and preservation of the civil
rights of *everyone*; to this end, a just government executes no law or
action in contrary. It is in ideal argument, surely -- many
counterexamples, even only in American history, could be leveled here --
but it is crucially important to note just how *general* this general
will is: it can only be defined as the best interest of *every single
member of a society*, and is comprised of only the *most basic
assurances and rights*. This is a serious challenge for deeply
democratic societies as large as the United States, whose members are as
diverse as all the nations of the world. I sympathize with and believe
in the argument that there are serious and systematic problems within
American society, but to claim that a government is illegitimate -- even
on such a well-justified claim that black Americans are systematically
marginalized -- has dire ramifications indeed for *all people*. I see no
faster path to total anarchy -- and, naturally, the abrogation of any
rights by Americans, black or otherwise -- than to claim the society we
have so carefully constructed and defended for the last 245 years is
illegitimate. There can be no other consequence here than of massive and
swift intervention by the government, justly used in the defense of the
common interest of the sovereign.

Here, we come at last: the use of violent protest, no matter how well
founded or justified, cannot reasonably be used to justify any movement
whatsoever by any group acting outside the interest of the sovereign
will. By membership in a society, we are obligated and subject to the
defense of the interest of not only the highest member, but also the
lowest. I share in the outrage, anger, and bitter disappointment felt by
many Americans when I watch a white police officer choke a black man to
death on a street. This is unconscionable -- equally unconscionable,
though, is the reversion to an outright state of war against America
itself. To seek recourse in the law by acting outside it is absurd, and
warrants an immediate reaction to stamp out violent opposition.

In this, I take a great deal of solace from the life and work of
peaceful protestors like Martin Luther King, Jr., and the many thousands
of Americans engaged in the peaceful protest of police brutality against
black Americans this year. On the basis of what our nation is founded
on, I see no other current example in bravery or citizenship. Though
frustratingly, heartbreakingly slow, the movements inspired by black
organizers and their supporters in the south during the 1960's is an
inspiring paragon not only for the example of all American citizens, but
also for the truest exercise of the higher faculty of mankind.

**The Reverse of the Coin: White Nationalism and Alt-Right Populism**

Perhaps one of the most disturbing trends in American politics I've seen
in the last ten years: the rise of populist, alt-right ideology in the
United States. This is an emergent problem in politics and social life
across the globe. Like many people, I was shocked when I read about the
Charlottesville "Unite the Right" rally, in which neo-nazis, white
nationalists/supremacists, and Trump-supporting conservatives gathered
wearing white polo shirts and store-bought tiki torches -- looking much
akin to a frat party on a panty raid -- gathered in Virginia in 2017 to
protest the removal of Confederate general Robert E. Lee's statue in Lee
Park. The event sparked widespread outrage across the US, generated
hours of cable news coverage, and drew sharp focus on the alt-right when
one of the white nationalists at the rally ran over twenty people,
killing one of them.

Like many people, I found it horrifying to read and see the footage of
the events, especially in a country in which we elected (and re-elected)
our first black president in 2008 and 2012.

It must be noted, however, that the issues surrounding the alt-right
movement now (demographic change, stagnation of working-class society,
political representation, gender roles/rights, and cultural conflict)
are neither novel nor particularly revolutionary problems: American
history is littered with overtly racist beliefs and events, arguing a
bad-faith conservation of the dominance of particular groups over
another. Many issues surrounding race in this country are recent
history, if ever buried in time, and the recent toxification of the
political arena and the unofficial efforts by many groups to
re-legitimize racist and white supremacist rhetoric in the political
arena must be addressed directly.

Samantha Kutner of the International Center on Counter-Terrorism is one
of a growing number of academic scholars taking a closer look at the
issue of white nationalism. Kutner, an alumna of the University of
Nevada, Reno, published a journal article titled *Swiping Right: The
Allure of Hyper Masculinity and Cryptofascism for Men Who Join the Proud
Boys* in 2020 as an effort to bring a greater focus on the push and pull
factors present among young white men that drive them into such
extremist ideology. In a rather interesting study, Kutner conducted
interviews with 17 members of the Proud Boys, ranging from new initiates
to inveterates via Twitter, encrypted apps, or telephone interviews. In
an attempt to accurately portray the views and history of the group, she
paints a portrait of the typical member: a young, white, Conservative
man excluded from society on the basis of shifting demographic or
cultural beliefs away from traditional values, who view themselves as
victims in a precarious position of defending white, western culture and
history against what they claim is white genocide. Oftentimes, members
commiserate about the "effeminate" state of society, which they believe
requires hyper-masculine reactions in order to combat a growing feminist
movement in American society. Utilizing unofficial, loosely
decentralized platforms for communication, and marshaled by the
(apparently) persuasive and charismatic Gavin McInnes, members
communicate largely through memes and internet message boards, where
they collectively air grievances in their "safe spaces" regarding their
predicament of being "too socially liberal for conservatives, too
conservative in many political views for liberals" -- or, as Kutner
ironically points out, their lack of social skills, in particular with
their ability in dating/forming lasting relationships with women.

Kutner records a general appreciation for the edginess and rebellious
nature of the movement among supporters, who ultimately bond with one
another and enjoy the sense of "brotherhood" and cameraderie that so
many of them have felt deprived of for most of their lives. In defense
of this newfound membership of their community, members often become
apologists for the more extreme views espoused by their members and
their leader McGinnes, citing the perceived necessity of self-defense in
the face of a growing leftist influence at colleges and universities. It
is not surprising, here, to learn that the last task in becoming a
fourth-degree member requires the use of violence against a group the
Proud Boys have aligned themselves against.

White nationalist violence is not an irregular event: even a cursory
search of the last decade will produce a terrifying array of mass
violence, often enacted by a lone actor, and inspired by literature
produced and disseminated by known hate groups. Pulled from the Southern
Poverty Law Center, below are only a few vignettes in American infamy
one can find with little to no effort.

American white nationalism, undoubtedly older than described here, can
be traced back to militias and extremo-conservative, libertarian
ideologies from the 1990's, especially in light of the events of Ruby
Ridge, Waco, or the Oklahoma City bombing perpetrated by Timothy
McVeigh. In 1990, Jared Taylor -- a former Japanese language teacher at
Harvard University - founded the New Century Foundation, an organization
dedicated to supporting and defending racist views which he continued to
propagate as editor of the magazine American Renaissance. In these
roles, Taylor advocated for a form of racial/biological determinism, in
which racism stems from "... an instinctive preference for their
\[one's\] own people.... And that they should prosper", which as a
biological mechanism is "healthy" and desirous. Taylor labels his views
as race realism, hearkening back to arguments often utilized from the
20^th^ century among eugenicists and -- notably -- the Nazis. Taylor
emphasizes the right for "whites to love, first and foremost, the
infinite riches created by European man". Taylor's views can be found
echoing within the Young Americans for Freedom, VDARE, Identity Evropa,
the British National Party, the French National Front, and the Council
for Conservative Citizens.

Surprising to some, these ideas were, until recently, found even among
mainstream news networks -- notably MSNBC, bastion of left-leaning
politics. Pat Buchanan, a former news host, was often interviewed by
Rachel Maddow and aired his own news segment on the channel, in which he
espoused proto-white nationalist rhetoric in an attempt to covertly
drive the ideology forward. In 2010, he was interviewed on the radio
show *Cesspool*, where he talked about the necessity of --
demographically -- increasing the birth rate of white Americans in order
to combat the demographic shift; he further defended the logic of a
gunman in El Paso, Texas, who walked into a Walmart in 2019 who murdered
29 people at gunpoint, believing he was defending America against an
"invasion" from South America as "an accurate and valid description". On
the 2011 mass shooting in Norway, where a gunman murdered 77 university
students after isolating them on a small island, Buchanan stated the
racism of the killer was "right". Buchanan later went on to write the
book (which is cited in neo-Nazi, white nationalist, and alt-right
circles as a central text) *Death of the West*, where he continues to
defend racially inflammatory rhetoric in support of white nationalism.
Buchanan is affiliated with the Sinclair broadcast group, of which Fox
News is an affiliate.

White nationalism is far from only an American issue. Stephan Molyneaux,
perhaps one of the most noxious contemporary advocates of the movement,
can be found espousing his beliefs in social determinism, race
superiority, and other pseudo-science errata on his radio broadcast in
Canada; he advocates for many of the same ideas and beliefs found in
previous paragraphs in his admittedly prolific, multi-thousand podcast
series. Molyneaux is a vocal and ardent backer of nationalist
politicians Donald Trump, Geert Wilders, Marine LePen, and of the author
Murray Rothbard (coiner of the phrase "anarcho-capitalism" and a
bell-curve racist); he also supports and props up the beliefs of David
Duke, former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan. Far from stopping there,
Molyneaux and his wife, Christina Papadopoulous (a disgraced
psychotherapist found guilty of professional misconduct by Canadian
psychiatrists) run a cultish, pseudo-therapeutic program for young,
white men in which one of the prime directives requires the initiate to
totally abandon and renounce the support of their families -- a service
which, surprisingly, generates alongside donations a substantial amount
of money.

Individuals like Molyneaux, Buchanan, and Taylor, who, for many, are
written off as the extreme racists they are, still find purchase among
the right crowd.

In 2012, Adam Lanza -- a high-school dropout, suffering from mental
health crises stemming from severe social isolation and Aspberger's
syndrome, murdered his mother by shooting her four times in the head
with a Bushmaster rifle; he then took her car to his old elementary
school, Sandy Hook, walked in the front door, and murdered 20 children,
5 teachers and staff, and, ultimately, himself. Lanza spent days holed
up in his room, active on online messaging groups and forums, with
little meaningful connection to his father (whose [account of his
son](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/03/17/the-reckoning)
is truly, in every sense of the word, heartrending) and arguably enabled
by a permissive mother. On a damaged hard drive found in Lanza's room,
police found an immaculately organized spreadsheet documenting over 500
mass shooting events, the weapons utilized, and analyses of their
efficacy. Lanza was 20 years old. The description of Lanza, given by his
father after the events of Sandy Hook, is horrific.

In 2014, Elliot Rodger, a 22 year-old college dropout coping with Autism
published a video outlining his manifesto, involvement and membership
within the incel community, and advocating for a world in which women
were exterminated in concentration camps. Rodger was a known user and
contributor on PuaHate where he posted racist and misogynistic screeds,
including a detailed account of an event in 2013 in which he was beaten
severely by men after attempting to push women off a ledge. He later
went on to stab three men to death after luring them into his apartment,
then rampaging through Isla Vistaon a shooting spree against a sorority,
where he killed three more and injured 14. He was chased down and shot
by police. **\
**

In 2015, Dylan Roof, 21 years old, who was inspired by the writings of
Jared Taylor and the Council for Conservative Citizens, walked into
Charleston Methodist church on June 17 in South Carolina with multiple
weapons, opening fire. He was regularly active and involved on the
website The Daily Stormer. He killed nine people and injured one. Roof,
a high-school dropout who suffered from opiod abuse and obsessive
compulsive disorder, was a regular contributor on alt-right websites,
where he was radicalized and motivated by posts describing massive and
increasingly more prevalent incidents on black-on-white crime.

The call to violence is often, but not necessarily, isolated to young,
white men. In 2017, former congressional candidate Robert Doggart was
convicted on charges of soliciting others to commit arson (and, likely,
murder) against a mosque in Islamburg, New York -- a frequent target of
white nationalist hate groups. Doggart, affiliated with white
nationalist militias, advocated for individuals willing to comply to
bomb the mosque with molotov cocktails and attack the building with
firearms and machetes. Regarding the attack, he stated that he "\[did
not\] want to kill children, but there's always collateral damage". He
was led to believe by alt-right literature to believe that residents and
patrons of the mosque had a plan to commit violent acts against American
citizens, and believed that it was his duty to marshal like-minded
individuals to, if necessary, conduct a preemptive attack on the mosque.
Doggart was diagnosed with narcissistic personality disorder, bipolar
disorder, and had his sentence appealed to 5 years after a technicality
in his trial led to a judge shortening his sentence from 20 years.

In 2018, Robert Bowers, a user of alt-right messaging platform GAB and
known supporter of the Proud Boys, Jim Quinn, Patrik Little, Brad
Griffin, and the League of the South, walked into the Tree of Life
Synagogue in Pittsburg, PA where he murdered 11 and injured 6. He was
radicalized after numerous discussions and conversations with alt-right
members such as the anti-Semite Jared Wyand. Before entering the
synagogue, Bowers posted online, describing the Jewish community as
"invaders", and his last online communication, posted after a discussion
regarding whether the alt-right should work harder to veil their
anti-Semitic, white supremacist message said: "screw your optics, I'm
going in".

The efficacy of online, extant alt-right groups must not be understated:
supposedly lone-wolf actors in American shootings are radicalized,
involved in, and are supported by openly or clandestinely-run
organizations. An organization called The Base (which, hilariously, is
the English translation of Al-Qaeda), founded by Rinaldo Nazarro and the
White NWF/NVA (white nationalist militias in the Pacific north-west),
espouses the ideologies of the white ethnostate and christian identity
movements spread by Richard Girnt Butler -- founder of the Aryan
Nations. Nazarro, a former member of the United States armed forces,
called for "revolutionary struggle", "lone-wolf operations", and
guerrilla warfare as a "propaganda of the deed" in 2017 after a stint in
prison and an encounter with James Mason's book *Siege*. A known
associate of Atomwaffen, Wire, Fascist Forge, SWAN, The Lads, Antipodean
Resistance (who ran a racist, anti-black/muslim protest in 2019), The
Base sought to recruit Brenton Harrison Tarrant into their organization,
and attempted to distance themselves from him after the events at
Christchurch, New Zealand, where Tarrant, a 28 year-old white male and
frequent user of 4Chan livestreamed himself walking into two mosques
with semi-auto shotguns and assault rifles, murdering 51 people.

Tarrant was an active supporter of the IBÖ, an Austrian branch of
Generation Identity, and of Blair Cottrell and fascism. Tarrant posted a
manifesto littered with neo-nazi symbology, and styled himself as an
etho-nationalist. Notably, the "14 words", a phrase coined by white
nationalist David Lane and used by many involved in the Proud Boys and
Identity Evropa to denote membership in white nationalist circles, were
inscribed on his rifle.

On August 25, 2020, a 17 year-old Illinois native drove across state
lines with an assault rifle to Kenosha, Wisconsin, with stated purpose
of defending the property of a car dealership that had experienced
property damage in relation to the massive protest of the police
shooting of Jacob Blake two days prior. Rittenhouse, a minor, illegally
transported the weapons across state lines, and was later recorded
shooting three protestors in an altercation on the streets of the city;
two of those protestors died, and a third was injured. Rittenhouse then
walked away from the scene of the crime, hands in the air and rifle
slung across his chest, as a multitude of police officers drove right
past him towards the scene of the crime, even as protestors who
witnessed the scene actively informed the officers that Rittenhouse was
the shooter.

Rittenhouse returned home, and later turned himself in to authorities on
August 26^th^ in Illinois.

For a case study in Colorado, look no further than Identity Evropa,
founded by Nathan Domingo and Patrick Casey who describe themselves as
"identitarians" (read: white nationalists) who believe in raising and
uplifting white, western culture. Identity Evropa is primarily focused
on actively spreading propaganda on college campuses, where they have
been known in 2019 to post posters, organize rallies, and create local
chapters among 13 college campuses from Fort Collins to Pueblo. Identity
Evropa was directly involved in the planning and execution of the Unite
the Right rally, and are known supporters of David Duke, J. Phillipe
Rushton, Nicholas Wade, John Bolear, the National Youth Front, and the
ideology of ethnopluralism (a veiled belief that espouses the importance
and establishment of distinct ethostates, in an attempt to legitimize
white nationalism). Organizations like that of Domingo and Casey skirt
the outermost edges of civil discourse, relying upon patently bad-faith
usage of free speech in order to discreetly advance racist, xenophobic,
and violent ideologies to young men.

**Organization, Structure, and Dynamics of Potentially Violent White
Nationalist Hate Groups**

The Department of Homeland Security, in their prescient 2011 publication
*Organizational Dynamics of far-Right Hate Groups* details a number of
factors, gleaned from an analysis of many extant publications and
databases of hate crimes, violent actions, protests, and events gathered
by state law enforcement agencies and hate group watchdogs such as
Klanwatch and the Southern Poverty Law Center. Federal organizations
have often recognized the serious threat that white extremist
organizations pose in the United States since the 1990's, especially
after the events of Waco, Ruby Ridge, and the Oklahoma City Bombing;
this recognizance, however, in the public domain remained a topic of
fringe discussion until the unfortunate events of the last decade. In
this report, the DHS gathered data regarding known hate groups that have
remained extant for at least three years. The DHS noted the rarity of an
organization remaining active past one year, citing the challenges (not
surprisingly) all political organizations face: membership, funding, and
involvement by its actors in promoting/propagating the group. The DHS
was largely motivated by its discovery of a lack of quantitative
research in the subject, even after markedly violent, disturbing events
with hate groups in the 1990's. It is widely reported in this study
that, among state law enforcement offices, far-right hate groups
represent the gravest concern regarding terrorism within the United
States.

After conducting a survey following these criteria, the DHS compiled a
database of 275 far-right groups, responsible for killing 560 people
between 1990 and 2010. Of these organizations, the report classifies
them as "violent" or "extremely violent", depending on the number or
magnitude of instances in which the group was active in violence against
others. The DHS classifies organizations on multiple statistical
variables, detailed in the diagram below.

![](./media/image2.png)

Figure 3: DHS (2011) predictors of violence among far-right hate groups

The variables most strongly correlated to a group's propensity for
violence are described in figure 3. A description of these variables is
necessary, though, to fully appreciate the DHS's findings.

*Organizational Capacity* describes a hate group's ability to recruit
new members, notably former military members, as well as the group's
age, overall size, and the state of its funding. The DHS found that,
while indeed true that far-right hate groups target and recruit former
military/police members, this recruitment was not as strongly correlated
to the group's odds of engaging in violence as the age of the group
itself and its overall size. Furthermore, funding itself was not
necessarily a predictor of violence: particularly well funded groups, it
seems, are more likely to be old or have a greater number of members,
and these predictors were more powerful in terms of predicting violence.
Notably, groups that were present at protests for far-right causes were
more likely to recruit and engage members in violent actions: having
"skin in the game", it seems, was a predictor of someone's ability or
willingness to physically act out versus someone recruited online.

*Organizational Constituency* describes a group's propensity for
attempting to legitimize their beliefs through literature and media
among the public, through political involvement, publication of
literature, involvement on the web, organized conferences, etc. The vast
majority of hate groups were active in disseminating at least one of
these strategies. Of the previous, the involvement in publication of
hate literature was the most closely correlated to involvement in
violence; in an interesting twist, however, the group itself publishing
the literature was not likely to incite/commit a violent crime. Hate
groups closely linked to publishers, instead, were the ones likely to
perpetrate a crime, in a variable described by *connectivity*. It is the
DHS's thinking that groups more active in publishing hate literature
have already drawn enough attention to themselves, and instead are more
focused on legitimizing the discourse surrounding their ideology rather
than the execution of their beliefs; this, the DHS believes, is best
left to other organizations tied to the publisher.

It is here that I would like to note the connection of "literature"
described by the DHS and the publication of "plausibly deniable" content
on the internet. This description of propaganda, while given in very
formal terms, can take an interesting turn when one considers the
persuasive power of informal methods of disseminating ideas -- YouTube
videos, news segments, memes, and social media posts.

*Connectivity* describes a group's propensity for connecting with and
forming -- oftentimes darkly competitive -- relationships with other
like-minded organizations. The DHS noted that groups with internecine
conflicts (those who, surprisingly, *disagree with* rather than *agree
with*) were more likely to be violent; this is perhaps seen as a way of
attempting to legitimize one's own organization over another. The
connection between the violently competitive culture among these groups
is particularly disturbing, and offers a fascinating window into
predictions of violence by known groups moving forward.

Lastly, *Structural Organization* describes a group's self-organization
strategies as hierarchical, traditional groups or as decentralized,
splinter "guerrilla warfare" groups. Of this category, groups with
highly charismatic leaders were particularly likely to engage in
violence, often incited by individuals who are particularly gifted in
rhetoric and persuasion. Decentralized groups were (and, in light of
modern events) *particularly* likely to be violent, and extremely so.

Each of these variables was useful and significant in the prediction of
a group's propensity for violence. The DHS, in studying these variables
ten years ago, contributed to a sorely anemic field of literature
surrounding organizations involved in hate crimes, violence, and
disruption of civil function in society. Research into the field
continues to lack serious, quantitative research; despite knowing that
far-right groups are much more likely to be responsible for
destructively engaging with American society and government, little in
the way of research, funding, and understanding of the problem has been
conducted in the last decade. A multitude of organizations -- aside from
the federal government -- are involved in attempting to solve this
problem, and they are often cited here in this essay.

**The Terrible Cost of Anger -- Radicalization**

It goes without saying -- or perhaps, unfortunately, with the necessity
of saying -- that the actions of Adam Lanza, Elliot Rodger, and Dylan
Roof -- among the many others responsible for the brutal murder of
American citizens by association -- that there is no forgivable
justification here. The actions of these individuals, fueled by
partisan, false, and horribly twisted rhetoric driven by baseless
cowards are no less than a complete renunciation of the work our nation
has done in the attempt to create a just society. If, in the case of
Black Lives Matter protests turning violent, we are drawn to the
conclusion that a government's responsibility is to the protection of
and provision of civil rights and law, and that such a government is
obligated to the defense of those rights forcefully if necessary, it is
unequivocally true that these hate groups represent something much
darker and more sinister still. The equation of these two groups is an
inherently flawed and particularly malignant attempt in delegitimizing
the very real problem of inequality in the United States, the lawful
action taken to address it, and the duty of the American citizen to
address the issue responsibly as a member of that society. I will never
give nor accept redress for the actions of the individuals I described
above. They are nothing short of cowards, and in relation to them, the
individuals driving such hateful ideologies are nothing more than
bastards.

This particular segment of research was, to me, deeply unsettling. One
of my first memories of moving to Colorado in 2012, was a discussion I
had with two new classmates in high school about the Sandy Hook school
shooting, gun rights, and politics. I had a cursory knowledge of the
events, and, I think given my youth, I wasn't able to fully appreciate
the terrible reality of what had occurred. When I was gathering research
on Adam Lanza -- and the other mass murderers I compiled for this essay
-- I was often struck by an awful conclusion:

These were young, white men, disillusioned by the world around them,
isolated and susceptible to malignant and hostile ideologies propagated
by hateful individuals.

They, even though acting on a set of fundamentally different beliefs
from myself, were as equally convinced of their standpoint as I am.

It wasn't until halfway through reading the account of Adam Lanza's
father that I recognized how closely related these people were to
myself, and to others that I know. Like many Americans, this year (let
alone the last four years, reading news headlines on the web/the
television about the state of our presidency) has been a particularly
vexing and infuriating time. I've seen events in the news that I never
would have envisioned happening in my own country. But, like myself, I
implore you to look inward, and address something within yourself that I
feel as well: the bitter, pessimistic *anger*. Anger is, like any other
emotion secondary or primary, part of the human experience. Anger drives
us to make change, to seek redress, and correct a problem. When
improperly utilized, it is blindly destructive. Ideologues and
extremists, if you don't keep yourself in check, will try to manipulate
you using your anger, your isolation, and your very human need for
justification and belonging.

After reading about Lanza, I came very near to tears. Here, under the
hateful ideology, the unforgivable crime, and the abysmal circumstances
in which he came to his conclusion, I recognized within myself a not
dissimilar anger and disappointment with the state of the world. Like
Lanza, I, and all of us, are products of the ideas, beliefs, and
statements we read, hear, and speak. It is easy to feel alone and
isolated, especially when one views the world as incorrigible; without
redress, or hope of the ability or avenue to enact change, extremism
takes foot and foments.

In 2020, I know I've felt a huge array of emotion in my personal life,
but also as I watch the events of the year unfold around me, whether
it's to do with the protests around racial inequality, the presidential
election, or the topic of white nationalism. I'm *angry.* And in that
anger, it's become increasingly easy for me to refuse to listen to
anything other than the narrow set of beliefs, the few sources of my
information, and the communities I surround myself with. **It's become
even easier to legitimize, if only through hyperbolic repetition,
extreme statements and stances in response to perceived or actual
injustice.**

You cannot let yourself succumb to this.

This is not a unique feeling: people of all races, creeds, and beliefs
have come into a world of late in which particular ideologies propagate
through media that is constantly and intrinsically connected to the way
we view the world and, more importantly, *how we view each other*. It
has never been easier than today to demonize the other and justify one's
own beliefs, no matter how wrong or harmful they are to others,
particularly if those beliefs give us a sense of community and
belonging. This has been the great draw of extremism throughout history
and throughout the world: the promise of a community, purpose, and
vindication. Watch for the sleight of hand -- it's subtle, but it's
there, I assure you.

When I listened to Trevor Noah ask the question "why don't black people
loot Target?", my first instinct was to agree: *why the fuck no*t? It's
taken months of research, thinking, discussion, and consideration of
ideas, arguments, and information outside of the narrow confines of what
the news, the internet, or like-minded individuals have told me to
finally come to the realization I've argued here. It took even longer
for me to recognize that, while not in the same vein as those in the
alt-right, I was just as radicalized in my beliefs as they were -- and
not even for good reasons. It's *hard goddamned work*. But in exercising
your faculty for considering an argument, for engaging in discourse with
others, and for engaging in the society you benefit from and exist
within, I hope you'll come to the realization about a few inalienable
facts. I know you'll become a better person for it.

In taking a moment to stop and question my beliefs, I learned a few
things about the world, and about myself. It's a lesson in civics I
never expected to learn -- and, I hope, never to have to learn again.
