---
author: Joe Hunt
title: Lonesome Road
subtitle: At the Intersection of Truth in Narrative
date: 1 August 2020
img: /uploads/Joe_Hunt_2020-08-01.jpg
---

*"How can you frighten a man whose hunger is not only in his own cramped
stomach but in the wretched bellies of his own children? You can't scare
him -- he has known a fear beyond every other\...in Kansas and Arkansas,
in Oklahoma and Texas and New Mexico, the tractors moved in and pushed
the tenants out. Three hundred thousand in California and more coming...
when property accumulates in too few hands it is taken away. And that
companion fact: when a majority of the people are hungry and cold they
will take by force what they need... repression works only to strengthen
and knit the repressed."*

*\~ John Steinbeck*

In 1929, the United States were enjoying the lavish excess provided by
an economy recklessly careening upward, widely regarded by its citizens
as robust and invulnerable. Speculation from investors in the US, as
well as overseas in European countries, led to a skyrocketing rise in
value for stock, unfettered lending, and abundant finance. What was
either ignored or unseen: grave agricultural overproduction from
farmers, leading to one of the most devastating ecological disasters in
US history; overexposure by everyday Americans in stock, leading to
severe and significant cutbacks in spending; the insolvency of American
banks, unable to return borrowed money to the people. By 1930, stock
markets across the globe were in free fall, banks were closing, and
people were out of work. The worst global economic depression in history
had eclipsed a period of unknown comfort and prosperity.

In America, the effects were felt across the country. Steel workers,
automobile manufacturers, store clerks, bankers, and agricultural
labourers all felt the effects, disproportionate on some groups as they
were. Iniquity, hunger, and desperation were hallmarks of the time. A
number of works -- fictitious and otherwise -- were written, shot, or
broadcast to represent the emotions, people, and circumstances of the
time. Perhaps the most recognizable work of literature from that era in
the US is John Steinbeck's *The Grapes of Wrath*, which illustrates for
readers the conditions that migrant farm workers of America experienced
during the period. Criticized by many for it's vulgarity, supposedly
unfair depictions of landowners, socialist/communist sympathies, and for
fomenting dissent, Steinbeck's novel, even now, remains a controversial
representation of America. Despite this, the novel is widely read, has
influenced a vast number of American readers, politicians, and
activists, and won the author the Nobel Prize in literature in 1962. In
Steinbeck's time, as well as our own, his work is praised for its
unflinching representation of the meanness and squalor of the conditions
many Americans found themselves in, drawing attention to the repressed,
and contributing to the richly tumultuous political discourse that the
America of the early 19^th^ century participated in.

*The Grapes of Wrath*, as fiction, was intended to highlight the truth
of the Depression that most Americans either weren't willing to
comprehend, or bore no witness to.

The question: what role does fiction serve in enlightening and unveiling
the truth? In the following, we will come to know the content of what
Steinbeck wrote about, the influences that existed upon his characters,
and the veracity of his claims by contrasting the story he wrote with
factual, first-hand accounts of survivors of the Great Depression,
catalogued by the Chicago author and oral historian Studs Terkel.

**John Steinbeck and *The Grapes of Wrath***

John Steinbeck (1902 -- 1968) hailed from Salinas, California, born to a
treasurer and schoolteacher. John enjoyed writing from a young age, and
published eight novels before becoming widely famous in 1939. In his
most famous novel, Steinbeck depicts the struggles of rural American
farmers as they travel west to California in pursuit of work, land, and
greater fortune during the Great Depression. Scenes highlighting the
bitter hostility towards inbound migrant workers abound: the Joad family
encounters violent acts of exclusion, coercion, and abuse throughout the
story. The reprieves that the Joads receive stem largely from the
efforts of others in their own condition. Only through the collective
action with fellow workers does the family ensure their children are
fed, the men clothed, and some dignity of the family upheld.

Steinbeck drew many of his observations and inspirations for his
characters, settings, and events from his voluntary work in the fields
alongside the people he would ultimately immortalize, sampled from
experiences in the agricultural fields working alongside Tom Collins, a
migrant worker himself and administrator of the Weedpatch camp near
Bakersfield, California.

Further scenes of violence against these workers by landowners, the
police, and local officials, most notably, perhaps, by the American
Legion and local sheriffs, often appear in the forefront of the family's
struggle across the southwest, drawing condemnation from Steinbeck.

Critics assail the depictions of American poverty, working conditions,
and the plight of labourers, particularly the criticism of police, which
drew a great deal of ire from the communities that Steinbeck wrote
about, resulting in significant backlash and from California residents
who resented their depiction in his novel. At one point, *The Grapes of
Wrath* was banned from schools in California following actions from Kern
county farmers organizations; since it's publication, it has been also
banned in libraries, schools, and states across the country on the basis
of vulgarity, explicit sexuality, and for maligning public perception of
large landowners and corporate farms. The response to his novel wasn't
only local: Steinbeck himself was caught in the crossfire for his
sympathy toward the Communist party, embodied by his membership in the
League of American Writers and a trip to Moscow in 1957. His
contributions to Communist-sympathizing writer's organizations won him
few friends politically.

**Studs Terkel and *Hard Times***

Studs Terkel (1912 -- 2008) was a Chicago-born oral historian and
author, serving as a radio host and writer for the Federal Writer's
Project in Chicago during the Great Depression. Hisis radio program
aired from 1952 -- 1997. From a young age, Terkel enjoyed speaking with
and learning about people from all walks of life, fostered by his
employment as a young man as a concierge. Terkel would later go on to
write a number of oral histories, including the Pulitzer prize-winning
1985 *The Good War. Hard Times*, published in 1970, documents the
recollections and opinions of bankers, musicians, labourers,
politicians, farmers, and artists who lived during the Great Depression,
serving as a cross-sectional study of the cultural, economic, and
political impact of the depression on American life. Terkel's collection
offers a comprehensive look at the social and political landscape of the
era, with accounts of the Roosevelt administration, the Dust Bowl,
labour union organization, the Bonus March, and the Communist Party USA,
to name only a few.

**The American Farmer and Labourer**

*"... They was weddin's, all in them houses. An' then I'd want to go in
town an' kill folks. 'Cause what'd they take when they tractored the
folks off the lan'? What'd they get so their 'margin a profit' was safe?
They got Pa dyin' on the groun', an' Joe yellin' his first breath, an'
me jerkin' like a billy goat under a bush in the night. What'd they get?
God knows the lan' ain't no good. Nobody been able to make a crop for
years. But them sons-a-bitches at their desks, they jus' chopped folks
in two for their margin a profit. They jus' cut 'em in two. Place where
folks live is them folks. They ain't whole, out lonely on the road in a
piled-up car. They ain't alive no more. Them sons-a-bitches killed
'em".*

At the heart of the novel, Grapes of Wrath is a story about
disenfranchised American labour. The Joad family, former landowners in
Oklahoma, are forced to seek greater fortune and a new home west in
California after their homestead is repossessed by the local bank, torn
down and turned into agricultural land worked by tractors and run by
corporate farms. The Joad family is composed of three generations: Ma
and Pa Joad, matriarch and patriarch; their parents; their
brother-in-law, Uncle John; Tom, Al, Rose of Sharon, Noah, Ruthie, and
Winfield Joad -- the 3^rd^ generation. The family is accompanied by Rose
of Sharon's husband and father of her unborn child, Connie Rivers, as
well as former preacher -- and the novel's most visible proselytizer --
Jim Casey. The eldest members of the Joad family pass away early in the
journey west, unable to cope with the supplantation of the family from
their home. The family further loses Noah, Connie, Uncle John, and Al as
they split off from the family, intent on finding their own fortune
separate from their original vision.

The toll of the journey: a fractured family, dispossessed of their
values, reduced to hunting for wage labour.

The Joads first leave for California in the hopes of well-paid work
picking crops on large farms, impelled by a leaflet published and
disseminated across the US by large-scale growers seeking cheap labour.
Along the way, the family encounters families converging on the same
goal alongside them, who watch the flight of wretched, broken people
stream out away from California. One such individual describes: "Maybe
he (the landowner) needs two hunderd men, so he talks to five hunderd,
an' they tell other folks, an' when you get to the place, they's a
thousan' men. This here fella says, "I'm payin' twenty cents an hour'.
An' maybe half a the men walk off. But they's still five hunderd that's
so goddamn hungry they'll work for nothin' but biscuits. Well, this here
fella's got a contract to pick them peaches or chop that cotton. You see
now? The more fellas he can get, an the hungrier, the less he's gonna
pay."

Throughout the latter half of the novel, Steinbeck illustrates the
phenomenon further: deputies and agents representing landowners solicit
migrants, often at exceedingly low wages, uncertain terms, and
duplicitous representations of working conditions. Stripped of natural
rights and subjugated into neo-serfdom, the travelers bargain and
protest with the only thing they have: their labour. Their strikes are
cracked down upon by local police, citizens, and farm owners, fed the
false pretext of damping down "agitators", "reds", and "Bolsheviks".

Jim Casey, witness of events transpiring on the road, in labour camps,
and in the spirit of the American, correctly identifies the spirit of
the time:

*"... if ya listen, you'll hear a movin', an' a sneakin', an' a
rustlin', an' -- an' a res'lessness. They's stuff goin' on that the
folks doin' it don't know nothin' about -- yet.... They's gonna come a
thing that's gonna change the whole country..."*

**The Labour Organizer César Chávez**

Terkel meets with and discusses the memories of one such agricultural
labourer, who describes to the reader his experiences not only
witnessing, but experiencing, the same troubles:

*"Oh, I remember having to move out of our house... He had inherited
this from his father, who had homesteaded it. I saw my two, three other
uncles also moving out. And for the same reason. The bank had foreclosed
on the loan...*

*One morning a giant tractor came in, like we had never seen before. My
daddy used to do all his work with horses. So this huge tractor came in
and began to knock down this corral, this small corral where my father
kept his horses. We didn't understand why. In the matter of a week, the
whole face of the land was changed. Ditches were dug, and it was
different....*

*We all of us climbed into an old Chevy that my dad had. And then we
were in California, and migratory workers... it must have been around
'36... we had been poor, but we knew every night there was a bed* there,
*and that* this *was our room... that all of a sudden changed. When
you're small, you can't figure these things out. You know something's
not right, and you don't like it, but you don't question it and you
don't let that get you down. You sort of just continue to move.*

*But this had quite an impact on my father. He had been used to owning
the land and all of a sudden thee was no more land."*

On migrant work and labour strikes:

*"... We trusted everybody that came around. You're traveling in
California with all your belongings in your car: it's obvious.... This
is bait for the labour contractor. Anywhere we stopped there was a
labour contractor offering all kinds of jobs and good wages, and we were
always deceived by them and we always went. Trust them...*

*We got hooked on a real scheme once. We were going by Fresno on our way
to Delano. We stopped at some service station and this labour contractor
saw the car. He offered a lot of money. We went. We worked the first
week: the grapes were pretty bad and we couldn't make much. We all
stayed off from school in order to make some money. Saturday we were to
be paid and we didn't get paid. He came and said the winery hadn't paid
him. We'd have money next week. He gave us \$10. My dad took the \$10
and went to the store and bought \$10 worth of groceries. So we worked
another week and in the middle of the second week, my father was asking
him for his last week's pay, and he had the same excuse. This went on
and we'd get \$5 or \$10 or \$7 a week for about four weeks. For the
whole family.*

*... The winery said they had paid him and they showed us where they had
paid him. This man had taken it."*

*"... My dad didn't like the conditions, and he began to agitate. Some
families would follow, and we'dg go elsewhere. Sometimes we'd come back.
We couldn't find a job elsewhere, so we'd come back. Sort of beg for a
job... We were among these families who always honoured somebody else's
grievance. Somebody would have a personal grievance with the employer...
Even when we were working, we'd honour it... They (the contractors) knew
it, and they rubbed it in quite well. Sort of shameful to come back. We
were trapped. We'd have to do it for a few days to get enough money to
get enough gas."*

Chávez later went on to found the United Farm Worker's Association (UFW)
in 1962, serving the interests and needs of Mexican-American farm
workers in the San Joaquin Valley; he helped organize labour strikes,
establish credit unions, and advocated for peaceful protest in support
of workers in the years to come.

**In the Shadow of the Valley**

When the Joad family does reach California, they find their expectations
at gross odds with reality. The family's first encounter of the
conditions in California is an unpleasant one: families living in abject
poverty, scraping together places to live out of used sacks, tarps,
tents, and turf. Children follow and linger around the family, silently
begging for food. There are many, many others looking for the same
opportunities as the Joads in the farmlands, but low wages, high
competition, and local sentiment keep the workers on the move, unable to
formally settle down anywhere. In one of the first labour camps the
family stops in, a young man named Floyd confirms for the Joads what was
explained to them before: local landowners, recognizing the enormous
labour force present, offer abysmally low wages for an hour's work.
Unlivable wages are competitive, as there is no shortage of hungry
children. Furthermore, by forcing migrant workers to continue moving,
they are denied the ability to own land or property, which further
prevents them from voting -- the major tool necessary to advocate for
their rights.

Tom Joad, appreciating the situation, asks why workers won't simply
refuse to work. The response is simple: landowners recognize that
workers can refuse the pay, and leave the produce to rot. However, known
leaders and instigators are targeted by police and local militias,
beaten, jailed, and removed from influence. Individuals caught
sympathizing or supporting organization are written onto a blacklist,
which prevents them from working again in the area. "Well, a fella eats
in jail anyways", Tom replies in exasperation, but hear the response:
"His kids don't. How'd you like to be in an' your kids starvin' to
death?".

In the same day, a labour contractor comes into the camp looking to hire
men for field work in Tulare county. Floyd, having seen the tactic
before, asks to see the contract, the wage, and how many men he'll be
hiring, arguing that if everything is above board, there'll be a
contract to sign, and the men would happily go to work. No such terms
are given. The contractor calls for his companion, Joe -- a local
sheriff\'s deputy -- who then falsely accuses Floyd of being involved in
a break-in at a car lot in an attempt to detain him, saying: "Might be a
good idear to go... Board of Health says we got to clean out this camp.
An' if it gets around that you got reds out here -- why, somebody might
git hurt. Be a good idear if all you fellas moved on to Tulare. They
isn't a thing to do aroun' here. That's jus' a friendly way a telling
you. Be a bunch of guys down here, maybe with pick handles, if you ain't
gone.".

**Mike Widman and the Detroit Ford Strike**

Similar scenes perforate American history in this period. Terkel
explores several such strikes, ranging from the Bonus March in
Washington by veterans in 1932 to automotive strikes in the late
thirties and early forties; in particular, he discusses the actions of
workers at a Ford assembly plant in Detroit, Michigan, who recollects
his experiences with the union and their struggle for better conditions.
Widman worked with John L. Lewis, a progressive unionizer serving with
the American Federation of Labour, The Congress of Industrial
Organizations, and the United Mine Workers of America. Widman describes
a strike that occurred in April of 1941.

*"... The life of a ford worker was quite miserable. These service men
(hired enforcers of the Ford motor company) were everywhere. The way
they'd throw men out ... today, anybody that wore a blue shirt got laid
off. Tomorrow, if you had brown hair, black hair, anything. No
recourse.*

*If they caught some of our people on the street, they slapped 'em
around. When some of our boys first wore union buttons or UAW baseball
caps, they were given the works. Some of our boys got fed up and next
thing a couple of service men were slightly hurt. That ended their
parading in public. But this was later...*

*On April 1, it happened. The five men on our grievance committee had
permission from the foreman to leave their job and see the division
superintendent. He said 'Talk to the employment office.' At the
employment office, they were told 'you left your jobs. You're fired.'*

*We asked the company, through the conciliator, to arbitrate this
matter. The answer was: they're fired, and we don't care what you do.
The word spread in the plant like wildfire...*

*We called the strike for 12:15, just after midnight. The boys on the
day shift stayed in the plant until four o'clock. Now both shifts were
inside. We were still trying to get the five men reinstated. Again the
company refused. So we let the midnight shift come in. Ford had about
eighty-nine thousand workers in that plant all at the same time....*

The strikers then set about blocking fourteen highways, using cars,
trash, trolley polls, and anything they could use to disrupt traffic.
They elicited a response from the governor, guaranteeing that the plant
wouldn't be shut down. Ford kept the plant open, but brought in 5,000
black workers to break the strike.

*"This was their first chance to work in the industry, and they were
fearful of losing their jobs. They weren't really scabbing. It was just
fear. They weren't doing any work. They were sitting there making all
kinds of homemade weapons, short pieces of iron and rubber pipe. They
were afraid somebody was gonna come in and get 'em. But we weren't
trying to get them out. Ford was keeping them in there twenty-four hours
a day. They never went home."*

All of this transpired six years after the passage of the Wagner Act, a
law set in place to protect the interests of workers' rights to
organize, strike, and resist unfair labour practices in the workplace.

**Migrant Camps**

Of particular focus in Steinbeck's novel is the home of these workers:
the labour camp. Oftentimes ramshackle, many of these were created
without much planning or organization, thrown up and torn down as
necessary while workers moved along to new prospects. Oftentimes, they
were small, an outcrop of tents around trucks and cars; at other points,
crude shacks and lean-to's fashioned from old sack, cardboard, and scrap
metal. Some landowners provided shelter for their workers -- whether as
a bid to justify low wages, or to prevent mass uprisings, it isn't
clear. Further in the novel, the Joads are employed as strike breakers
and provided with a rough house, clearly disused from previous
occupants. Even this, though, the family despises: Ruthie makes the
pitiful argument that she'd prefer sleeping in their own tent, rather
than share the flop houses.

There is one lone example of a camp that is well organized, clean, and
fair to it's occupants -- Weedpatch. The family enters by night, and is
guided toward a place to set up camp. Weedpatch is a federally-funded
camp for migrant workers, established with running water and permanent
structures by the Resettlement Administration. The camp is run by
elected officials chosen among the residents, whose role it is to
establish rules, keep order, and police their individual sanitary units.
Outside influence from landowners, police, or even preachers isn't
tolerated. The Joad family, accustomed to much rougher living
situations, are stunned to see such a well-run camp. The family is
quickly introduced to the women's committee, who see about ensuring new
residents understand the rules of the camp, know how to participate, and
are provided with the necessities to care for their families.

Tom Joad strikes out the next morning looking for work laying gas
pipelines on a farm, invited by two other workers. When they arrive at
the ranch, they ask the owner about Tom working, which begets the a
conversation regarding the lowering of their wages. The farmowner, angry
about the situation, explains the cause, stemming from the Farmers'
Association:

*"Well, I belong to it. We had a meeting last night. Now do you know who
runs the Farmers' Association? I'll tell you, The Bank of the West. That
bank owns most of this valley, and it's got paper on everything it don't
own. So last night the member from the bank told me, he said, 'You're
paying thirty ents an hour. You'd better cut it down to twenty-five.' I
said, 'I've got good men. They're worth thirty.' And he says, 'It isn't
that,' he says, 'The wage is twenty-five now. If you pay thirty, it'll
only cause unrest. And by the way,' he says, ' you going to need the
usual amount for a crop loan next year?'"*

The forces acting on the worker didn't end at sundown: pressure was
exerted on migrant camps by landowners, who suspected camps like
Weedpatch of nursing and supporting pro-communist sympathizers. The
collectivization of workers was seen as a legitimate threat to their way
of life, and was not solely a regional concern: critics of the federal
Resettlement Administration, the Agricultural Adjustment Administration,
and the Farm Security Administration argued that they contributed to
socializing the American labourer. Efforts by the FSA to resettle and
re-educate farmers en-masse were hamstrung by Congress.

*The Grapes of Wrath* forces the reader to reckon with these sentiments.
In the same conversation with Thomas, the landowner that Joad is talking
to about securing work, the labourers are tipped off to a plan to
instigate a riot at Weedpatch, supported by the local landowners, as a
way of justifying the shutdown of the camp:

*"Thomas walked quickly back to the house. The door slammed after him.
In a moment he was back, and he carried a newspaper in his hand. 'Did
you see this? Here, I'll read it: "Citizens, angered at red agitators,
burn squatters' camp..."*

*\...Well, the Association don't like the government camps. Can't get a
deputy in there. The people make their own laws, I hear, and you can't
arrest a man without a warrant. Now if there was a big fight and maybe
shooting -- a bunch of deputies could go in and clean out the camp.'*

*\...'Why, for God's sake? Those folks ain't bothering nobody.'*

*'I'll tell you why', Thomas said. 'Those folks in the camp are getting
used to being treated like humans. When they go back to the squatters'
camps they'll be hard to handle.'*

**The Agricultural Adjustment Administration and Rex Tugwell**

Recognizing the dire situation in the west, the Roosevelt administration
set about forming a bureau specifically designed to address the concerns
of farmers in US. Established in 1933, and headed by FDR's Secretary of
Agriculture Henry Wallace, the organization sought to raise the price of
grown goods and livestock, providing subsidies and benefit to American
farmers. C.B. Baldwin, administrator of the restructured Resettlement
Administration, recounts his experience working with Wallace and the AAA
during Wallace's tenure in politics.

*"Wallace was actually opposed to crop restriction. Very few people know
this. But we had a problem. Hog prices had just gone to hell. What were
they -- four, five cents a pound? The farmers were starving to death.
They were at the mercy of the packers. We tried to reach an agreement,
similar to the tobacco deal (an agreement with industry processors to
raise the price) -- which, despite everything, had worked out fairly
well.*

*They decided to slaughter piggy sows... They decided to pay the farmers
to kill them and the little pigs. Lots of 'em went into fertilizer. This
is one of the horribly contradictions we're still seeing.*

*They lowered the supply goin' to market and the prices immediately went
up. Then a great cry went up from the press, particularly the Chicago*
Tribune*, about Henry Wallace slaughtering these little pigs. You'd
think they were precious babies. The situation was such, you had to take
emergency measures. Wallace never liked it.*

*You had a similar situation on cotton. Prices were down to four cents a
pound and the cost of producing was probably ten. So a program was
initiated to plow up cotton. A third of the crop, if I remember. Cotton
prices went up to ten cents, maybe eleven."*

Administrators of the AAA harboured serious concerns about the welfare
of tenant and sharecroppers. Understanding that the landowners bore the
largest benefit from government subsidies, the AAA sought to directly
share the benefits of the program to the men and women working the
field, which was often difficult to do. Baldwin recalls a picket against
the Department of Agriculture by the Southern Tenant Farmers Union,
which he acknowledges the legitimacy and necessity of, given the
department's failures to always work for the benefit of the people.
Despite their good intentions, the AAA inadvertently affected
sharecroppers and tenant farmers negatively, in particular black farmers
in the south.

Baldwin also recollects his experiences working with the Rural
Rehabilitation Division, a department under the Resettlement
Administration run by Rex Tugwell from 1935 -- 1937, later run by him.

*"The Rural Rehabilitation had to do with buying sub-marginal land. To
retire it from cultivation, reforest it and convert it into a state
park. Much of the land we were authorized to buy was in the Great Plains
area, damaged by dust storms. Tugwell's idea was: These people should be
moved to better land, mot just kicked off bad land.*

*This is what Rex and I were most interested in. There were about six
million farmers in the country. I think we helped over a sixth of the
farm families. A million farms. The most exciting part was the
resettlement projects.*

*Tugwell had a passion for athe adjustment of people to the land. But
being a good economist, he foresaw what was gonna happen to small
farmers, who just couldn't meet the competition. So we set up a number
of co-op farms, about a hundred of 'em around the country. About twenty
thousand families...*

*I'll just tell you about one of 'em. We bought this beautiful delta
land in Arkansas for about \$100 an acre. It's worth about \$700 now. We
set up this little community of five or six thousand acres. We brought
in about fifty young families. A carefully selected group of young
families...*

*We built these houses, put in a school, nursery... they had individual
garden plots. It was diversified land -- livestock, cotton, fruits,
vegetables. They were paid so much a month, and at the end of the year,
when the crops were in, they'd divide the profits. It has been operating
about two years. They were doin' pretty well...*

*Will Alexander spent several days on the project visiting with these
families. He'd talk to them in the evening, when they were relaxed.
They'd say 'Dr. Alexander, this is wonderful. You know, if we're able to
stay here four, five years, we'll be able to go out on our own farm'.*

*It came to us as sort of a shock. See, this hunger for land
ownership... Although they were happy and more secure than they'd ever
been in their lives, they were lookin' forward to getting' out and
ownin' their own land. You have to reckon with this kind of thing.*

*These projects were all stopped cold, after the death of Roosevelt, all
liquidated. Congress saw to it. It's one of the really sad things. They
had all sort of problems, sure -- but this certainly would have been an
important answer to poverty, as we see it now. Over half the farm
families have disappeared. They are contributing to the ghetto problems
of the city, black and white."*

Baldwin later worked to employ photographers, such as Dorothea Lange, to
photograph the plight of the American migrant. Lange, alongside Jack
Delano, Marion Post Wolcott, and many others, worked to represent on
film the face of the Depression. The photographs taken by this group
were interred in the Library of Congress; 164,000 finished negatives
have been made available online for public viewing.

One of the most famous, published in a San Francisco editorial, you have
already seen: "*Migrant Mother"*, by Dorothea Lange.

**Epilogue**

The accounts of the Joad family, crafted from Steinbeck's experiences
working himself with migrant workers and through his relationship and
correspondence with Tom Collins, horrify and stun. The depths of misery
that a man or woman can witness, least of all in our own country, are
difficult to observe. Terkel, himself a dedicated historian and curator
of American memories, similarly refuses to shy away from the harsh
realities and experiences of the people; in interviewing Americans, his
work not only creates a repository of memory, it legitimizes and lends
credence to events and people who's suffering and struggles were so
great. Far from complete, the examples chosen here highlight only a few
of the efforts that many Americans made to survive or support themselves
and their families, only a few generations ago.

To forget history is not simply to tarnish memory, or to cripple
progress: it is the marginalization of so many men and women, whose
actions and stories not only inform us of what came before, but inspire
us forward in the present towards a better future.

Tom speaks best, in his final chapter; in response to all he has
witnessed, he speaks to his mother before leaving her:

*"\...Well, maybe like Casy says, a fella ain't got a soul of his own,
but on'y a piece of a big one -- an' then - .... Then it don' matter.
Then I'll be all aroun' in the dark. I'll be ever'where -- wherever you
look. Wherever they's a fight so hungry people can eat, I'll be there.
Wherever they's a cop beatin' up a guy, I'll be there. If Casy knowed,
why, I'll be in the way guys yell when they're mad an' -- I'll be in the
way kids laugh when they're hungry an' they know supper's ready. An'
when our folks eat the stuff they raise an' live in the houses they
build -- why, I'll be there\..."*
